Brain
Brain of a chimpanzee
Details
Part of
Nervous system
Identifiers
Latin
cerebrum
Greek
encephalon
MeSH
D001921 (https://mesh
b.nlm.nih.gov/record/ui?
ui=D001921)
NeuroNames 21 (http://braininfo.rprc.
washington.edu/central
directory.aspx?ID=21)
TA98
A14.1.03.001 (https://ifa
a.unifr.ch/Public/EntryPa
ge/TA98%20Tree/Entit
y%20TA98%20EN/14.1.
03.001%20Entity%20TA
98%20EN.htm)
TA2
5415 (https://ta2viewer.
openanatomy.org/?id=5
415)
Anatomical terminology
Brain
The brain is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous
system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals. It
consists of nervous tissue and is typically located in the head
(cephalization), usually near organs for special senses such as
vision, hearing and olfaction. Being the most specialized organ,
it is responsible for receiving information from the sensory
nervous system, processing those information (thought,
cognition, and intelligence) and the coordination of motor
control (muscle activity and endocrine system).
While invertebrate brains arise from paired segmental ganglia
(each of which is only responsible for the respective body
segment) of the ventral nerve cord, vertebrate brains develop
axially from the midline dorsal nerve cord as a vesicular
enlargement at the rostral end of the neural tube, with
centralized control over all body segments. All vertebrate brains
can be embryonically divided into three parts: the forebrain
(prosencephalon, 
subdivided 
into 
telencephalon 
and
diencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon) and hindbrain
(rhombencephalon, 
subdivided 
into 
metencephalon 
and
myelencephalon). The spinal cord, which directly interacts with
somatic functions below the head, can be considered a caudal
extension of the myelencephalon enclosed inside the vertebral
column. Together, the brain and spinal cord constitute the
central nervous system in all vertebrates.
In humans, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16
billion neurons,[1] and the estimated number of neurons in the
cerebellum is 55–70 billion.[2] Each neuron is connected by
synapses to several thousand other neurons, typically
communicating with one another via root-like protrusions called
dendrites and long fiber-like extensions called axons, which are
usually myelinated and carry trains of rapid micro-electric
signal pulses called action potentials to target specific recipient
cells in other areas of the brain or distant parts of the body. The
prefrontal cortex, which controls executive functions, is
particularly well developed in humans.
Physiologically, brains exert centralized control over a body's
other organs. They act on the rest of the body both by
generating patterns of muscle activity and by driving the
Cross section of the olfactory bulb of a rat,
stained in two different ways at the same
time: one stain shows neuron cell bodies,
the other shows receptors for the
neurotransmitter GABA.
secretion of chemicals called hormones. This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to
changes in the environment. Some basic types of responsiveness such as reflexes can be mediated by the
spinal cord or peripheral ganglia, but sophisticated purposeful control of behavior based on complex
sensory input requires the information integrating capabilities of a centralized brain.
The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they
cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved.[3] Recent models in modern neuroscience treat the
brain as a biological computer, very different in mechanism from a digital computer, but similar in the sense
that it acquires information from the surrounding world, stores it, and processes it in a variety of ways.
This article compares the properties of brains across the entire range of animal species, with the greatest
attention to vertebrates. It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains. The
ways in which the human brain differs from other brains are covered in the human brain article. Several
topics that might be covered here are instead covered there because much more can be said about them in a
human context. The most important that are covered in the human brain article are brain disease and the
effects of brain damage.
The shape and size of the brain varies greatly between
species, and identifying common features is often difficult.[4]
Nevertheless, there are a number of principles of brain
architecture that apply across a wide range of species.[5]
Some aspects of brain structure are common to almost the
entire range of animal species;[6] others distinguish
"advanced" brains from more primitive ones, or distinguish
vertebrates from invertebrates.[4]
The simplest way to gain information about brain anatomy is
by visual inspection, but many more sophisticated techniques
have been developed. Brain tissue in its natural state is too
soft to work with, but it can be hardened by immersion in
alcohol or other fixatives, and then sliced apart for
examination of the interior. Visually, the interior of the brain consists of areas of so-called grey matter, with
a dark color, separated by areas of white matter, with a lighter color. Further information can be gained by
staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of
molecules are present in high concentrations. It is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue
using a microscope, and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another.[7]
The brains of all species are composed primarily of two broad classes of cells: neurons and glial cells. Glial
cells (also known as glia or neuroglia) come in several types, and perform a number of critical functions,
including structural support, metabolic support, insulation, and guidance of development. Neurons,
however, are usually considered the most important cells in the brain.[8] The property that makes neurons
unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells over long distances.[8] They send these signals
by means of an axon, which is a thin protoplasmic fiber that extends from the cell body and projects,
usually with numerous branches, to other areas, sometimes nearby, sometimes in distant parts of the brain or
Structure
Cellular structure
Neurons generate electrical signals that
travel along their axons. When a pulse of
electricity reaches a junction called a
synapse, it causes a neurotransmitter
chemical to be released, which binds to
receptors on other cells and thereby alters
their electrical activity.
body. The length of an axon can be extraordinary: for
example, if a pyramidal cell (an excitatory neuron) of the
cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became
the size of a human body, its axon, equally magnified, would
become a cable a few centimeters in diameter, extending
more than a kilometer.[9] These axons transmit signals in the
form of electrochemical pulses called action potentials, which
last less than a thousandth of a second and travel along the
axon at speeds of 1–100 meters per second. Some neurons
emit action potentials constantly, at rates of 10–100 per
second, usually in irregular patterns; other neurons are quiet
most of the time, but occasionally emit a burst of action
potentials.[10]
Axons transmit signals to other neurons by means of
specialized junctions called synapses. A single axon may
make as many as several thousand synaptic connections with
other cells.[8] When an action potential, traveling along an
axon, arrives at a synapse, it causes a chemical called a
neurotransmitter to be released. The neurotransmitter binds to
receptor molecules in the membrane of the target cell.[8]
Synapses are the key functional elements of the brain.[11]
The 
essential 
function 
of 
the 
brain 
is 
cell-to-cell
communication, and synapses are the points at which communication occurs. The human brain has been
estimated to contain approximately 100 trillion synapses;[12] even the brain of a fruit fly contains several
million.[13] The functions of these synapses are very diverse: some are excitatory (exciting the target cell);
others are inhibitory; others work by activating second messenger systems that change the internal
chemistry of their target cells in complex ways.[11] A large number of synapses are dynamically modifiable;
that is, they are capable of changing strength in a way that is controlled by the patterns of signals that pass
through them. It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain's primary
mechanism for learning and memory.[11]
Most of the space in the brain is taken up by axons, which are often bundled together in what are called
nerve fiber tracts. A myelinated axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath of myelin, which serves to
greatly increase the speed of signal propagation. (There are also unmyelinated axons). Myelin is white,
making parts of the brain filled exclusively with nerve fibers appear as light-colored white matter, in contrast
to the darker-colored grey matter that marks areas with high densities of neuron cell bodies.[8]
Except for a few primitive organisms such as sponges (which have no nervous system)[14] and cnidarians
(which have a diffuse nervous system consisting of a nerve net),[14] all living multicellular animals are
bilaterians, meaning animals with a bilaterally symmetric body plan (that is, left and right sides that are
approximate mirror images of each other).[15] All bilaterians are thought to have descended from a common
Evolution
Generic bilaterian nervous system
Nervous system of a generic bilaterian animal, in
the form of a nerve cord with segmental
enlargements, and a "brain" at the front
Fruit flies (Drosophila) have been
extensively studied to gain insight
into the role of genes in brain
development.
ancestor that appeared late in the Cryogenian period,
700–650 million years ago, and it has been
hypothesized that this common ancestor had the shape
of a simple tubeworm with a segmented body.[15] At a
schematic level, that basic worm-shape continues to be
reflected in the body and nervous system architecture
of all modern bilaterians, including vertebrates.[16] The
fundamental bilateral body form is a tube with a
hollow gut cavity running from the mouth to the anus,
and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a ganglion) for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion
at the front, called the brain. The brain is small and simple in some species, such as nematode worms; in
other species, such as vertebrates, it is a large and very complex organ.[4] Some types of worms, such as
leeches, also have an enlarged ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord, known as a "tail brain".[17]
There are a few types of existing bilaterians that lack a recognizable brain, including echinoderms and
tunicates. It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates
that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain, or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the
disappearance of a previously existing brain structure.
This category includes tardigrades, arthropods, molluscs, and
numerous types of worms. The diversity of invertebrate body plans
is matched by an equal diversity in brain structures.[18]
Two groups of invertebrates have notably complex brains:
arthropods (insects, crustaceans, arachnids, and others), and
cephalopods (octopuses, squids, and similar molluscs).[19] The
brains of arthropods and cephalopods arise from twin parallel nerve
cords that extend through the body of the animal. Arthropods have
a central brain, the supraesophageal ganglion, with three divisions
and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing.[19]
Cephalopods such as the octopus and squid have the largest brains
of any invertebrates.[20]
There are several invertebrate species whose brains have been studied intensively because they have
properties that make them convenient for experimental work:
Fruit flies (Drosophila), because of the large array of techniques available for studying their
genetics, have been a natural subject for studying the role of genes in brain development.[21]
In spite of the large evolutionary distance between insects and mammals, many aspects of
Drosophila neurogenetics have been shown to be relevant to humans. The first biological
clock genes, for example, were identified by examining Drosophila mutants that showed
disrupted daily activity cycles.[22] A search in the genomes of vertebrates revealed a set of
analogous genes, which were found to play similar roles in the mouse biological clock—and
therefore almost certainly in the human biological clock as well.[23] Studies done on
Drosophila, also show that most neuropil regions of the brain are continuously reorganized
throughout life in response to specific living conditions.[24]
Invertebrates
The brain of a shark
The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, like Drosophila, has been studied largely
because of its importance in genetics.[25] In the early 1970s, Sydney Brenner chose it as a
model organism for studying the way that genes control development. One of the advantages
of working with this worm is that the body plan is very stereotyped: the nervous system of the
hermaphrodite contains exactly 302 neurons, always in the same places, making identical
synaptic connections in every worm.[26] Brenner's team sliced worms into thousands of
ultrathin sections and photographed each one under an electron microscope, then visually
matched fibers from section to section, to map out every neuron and synapse in the entire
body.[27] The complete neuronal wiring diagram of C.elegans – its connectome was
achieved.[28] Nothing approaching this level of detail is available for any other organism, and
the information gained has enabled a multitude of studies that would otherwise have not
been possible.[29]
The sea slug Aplysia californica was chosen by Nobel Prize-winning neurophysiologist Eric
Kandel as a model for studying the cellular basis of learning and memory, because of the
simplicity and accessibility of its nervous system, and it has been examined in hundreds of
experiments.[30]
The first vertebrates appeared over 500 million years ago (Mya), during the
Cambrian period, and may have resembled the modern hagfish in form.[31]
Jawed fish appeared by 445 Mya, amphibians by 350 Mya, reptiles by 310
Mya and mammals by 200  Mya (approximately). Each species has an
equally long evolutionary history, but the brains of modern hagfishes,
lampreys, sharks, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals show a gradient of
size and complexity that roughly follows the evolutionary sequence. All of
these brains contain the same set of basic anatomical components, but many
are rudimentary in the hagfish, whereas in mammals the foremost part (the
telencephalon) is greatly elaborated and expanded.[32]
Brains are most commonly compared in terms of their size. The relationship
between brain size, body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate
species. As a rule, brain size increases with body size, but not in a simple linear proportion. In general,
smaller animals tend to have larger brains, measured as a fraction of body size. For mammals, the
relationship between brain volume and body mass essentially follows a power law with an exponent of
about 0.75.[33] This formula describes the central tendency, but every family of mammals departs from it to
some degree, in a way that reflects in part the complexity of their behavior. For example, primates have
brains 5 to 10 times larger than the formula predicts. Predators tend to have larger brains than their prey,
relative to body size.[34]
All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form, which appears most clearly during early stages of
embryonic development. In its earliest form, the brain appears as three swellings at the front end of the
neural tube; these swellings eventually become the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain (the prosencephalon,
mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon, respectively). At the earliest stages of brain development, the three
areas are roughly equal in size. In many classes of vertebrates, such as fish and amphibians, the three parts
remain similar in size in the adult, but in mammals the forebrain becomes much larger than the other parts,
and the midbrain becomes very small.[8]
Vertebrates
The main subdivisions of the embryonic
vertebrate brain (left), which later
differentiate into structures of the adult
brain (right)
The main anatomical regions of the
vertebrate brain, shown for shark and
human. The same parts are present,
but they differ greatly in size and
shape.
The brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue.[8] Living
brain tissue is pinkish on the outside and mostly white on the
inside, with subtle variations in color. Vertebrate brains are
surrounded by a system of connective tissue membranes called
meninges that separate the skull from the brain. Blood vessels
enter the central nervous system through holes in the
meningeal layers. The cells in the blood vessel walls are joined
tightly to one another, forming the blood–brain barrier, which
blocks the passage of many toxins and pathogens[35] (though
at the same time blocking antibodies and some drugs, thereby
presenting special challenges in treatment of diseases of the
brain).[36]
Neuroanatomists usually divide the vertebrate brain into six
main regions: the telencephalon (cerebral hemispheres),
diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), mesencephalon (midbrain), cerebellum, pons, and medulla
oblongata. Each of these areas has a complex internal structure. Some parts, such as the cerebral cortex and
the cerebellar cortex, consist of layers that are folded or convoluted to fit within the available space. Other
parts, such as the thalamus and hypothalamus, consist of clusters of many small nuclei. Thousands of
distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural
structure, chemistry, and connectivity.[8]
Although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate
brains, some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial
distortions of brain geometry, especially in the forebrain area. The
brain of a shark shows the basic components in a straightforward
way, but in teleost fishes (the great majority of existing fish species),
the forebrain has become "everted", like a sock turned inside out. In
birds, there are also major changes in forebrain structure.[37] These
distortions can make it difficult to match brain components from
one species with those of another species.[38]
Here is a list of some of the most important vertebrate brain
components, along with a brief description of their functions as
currently understood:
The medulla, along with the spinal cord, contains many
small nuclei involved in a wide variety of sensory and
involuntary motor functions such as vomiting, heart rate
and digestive processes.[8]
The pons lies in the brainstem directly above the
medulla. Among other things, it contains nuclei that
control often voluntary but simple acts such as sleep,
respiration, swallowing, bladder function, equilibrium,
eye movement, facial expressions, and posture.[39]
The hypothalamus is a small region at the base of the forebrain, whose complexity and
importance belies its size. It is composed of numerous small nuclei, each with distinct
connections and neurochemistry. The hypothalamus is engaged in additional involuntary or
partially voluntary acts such as sleep and wake cycles, eating and drinking, and the release
of some hormones.[40]
The thalamus is a collection of nuclei with diverse functions: some are involved in relaying
information to and from the cerebral hemispheres, while others are involved in motivation.
The subthalamic area (zona incerta) seems to contain action-generating systems for several
types of "consummatory" behaviors such as eating, drinking, defecation, and copulation.[41]
The cerebellum modulates the outputs of other brain systems, whether motor-related or
thought related, to make them certain and precise. Removal of the cerebellum does not
prevent an animal from doing anything in particular, but it makes actions hesitant and clumsy.
This precision is not built-in but learned by trial and error. The muscle coordination learned
while riding a bicycle is an example of a type of neural plasticity that may take place largely
within the cerebellum.[8] 10% of the brain's total volume consists of the cerebellum and 50%
of all neurons are held within its structure.[42]
The optic tectum allows actions to be directed toward points in space, most commonly in
response to visual input. In mammals, it is usually referred to as the superior colliculus, and
its best-studied function is to direct eye movements. It also directs reaching movements and
other object-directed actions. It receives strong visual inputs, but also inputs from other
senses that are useful in directing actions, such as auditory input in owls and input from the
thermosensitive pit organs in snakes. In some primitive fishes, such as lampreys, this region
is the largest part of the brain.[43] The superior colliculus is part of the midbrain.
The pallium is a layer of grey matter that lies on the surface of the forebrain and is the most
complex and most recent evolutionary development of the brain as an organ.[44] In reptiles
and mammals, it is called the cerebral cortex. Multiple functions involve the pallium,
including smell and spatial memory. In mammals, where it becomes so large as to dominate
the brain, it takes over functions from many other brain areas. In many mammals, the
cerebral cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures
called sulci. The folds increase the surface area of the cortex and therefore increase the
amount of gray matter and the amount of information that can be stored and processed.[45]
The hippocampus, strictly speaking, is found only in mammals. However, the area it derives
from, the medial pallium, has counterparts in all vertebrates. There is evidence that this part
of the brain is involved in complex events such as spatial memory and navigation in fishes,
birds, reptiles, and mammals.[46]
The basal ganglia are a group of interconnected structures in the forebrain. The primary
function of the basal ganglia appears to be action selection: they send inhibitory signals to
all parts of the brain that can generate motor behaviors, and in the right circumstances can
release the inhibition, so that the action-generating systems are able to execute their actions.
Reward and punishment exert their most important neural effects by altering connections
within the basal ganglia.[47]
The olfactory bulb is a special structure that processes olfactory sensory signals and sends
its output to the olfactory part of the pallium. It is a major brain component in many
vertebrates, but is greatly reduced in humans and other primates (whose senses are
dominated by information acquired by sight rather than smell).[48]
Modern reptiles and mammals diverged from a common ancestor around 320 million years ago.[49]
Interestingly, the number of extant reptiles far exceeds the number of mammalian species, with 11,733
recognized species of reptiles[50] compared to 5,884 extant mammals.[51] Along with the species diversity,
reptiles have diverged in terms of external morphology, from limbless to tetrapod gliders to armored
chelonians, reflecting adaptive radiation to a diverse array of environments.[52][53]
Reptiles
Anatomical comparison between the brain of a lizard (A and C) and
the brain of a turkey (B and D). Abbreviations: Olf, olfactory lobes;
Hmp, cerebral hemispheres; Pn, pineal gland ; Mb, optic lobes of
the middle brain ; Cb, cerebellum; MO, medulla oblongata; ii, optic
nerves; iv and vi, nerves for the muscles of the eye; Py, pituitary
body.
Comparison of Vertebrate Brains: Mammalian, Reptilian,
Amphibian, Teleost, and Ammocoetes. CB., cerebellum; PT.,
pituitary body; PN., pineal body; C. STR., corpus striatum; G.H.R.,
right ganglion habenulæ. I., olfactory; II., optic nerves.
Morphological differences are reflected
in the nervous system phenotype, such
as: absence of lateral motor column
neurons in snakes, which innervate limb
muscles controlling limb movements;
absence of motor neurons that innervate
trunk muscles in tortoises; presence of
innervation from the trigeminal nerve to
pit organs responsible to infrared
detection in snakes.[52] Variation in size,
weight, and shape of the brain can be
found within reptiles.[54] For instance,
crocodilians have the largest brain
volume to body weight proportion,
followed by turtles, lizards, and snakes.
Reptiles vary in the investment in
different brain sections. Crocodilians
have the largest telencephalon, while
snakes have the smallest. Turtles have
the largest diencephalon per body
weight whereas crocodilians have the
smallest. On the other hand, lizards
have the largest mesencephalon.[54]
Yet 
their 
brains 
share 
several
characteristics 
revealed 
by 
recent
anatomical, molecular, and ontogenetic
studies.[55][56][57] Vertebrates share the
highest levels of similarities during
embryological development, controlled
by conserved transcription factors and
signaling 
centers, 
including 
gene
expression, morphological and cell type
differentiation.[55][52][58] In fact, high
levels of transcriptional factors can be
found in all areas of the brain in reptiles
and mammals, with shared neuronal
clusters enlightening brain evolution.[56]
Conserved 
transcription 
factors
elucidate 
that 
evolution 
acted 
in
different areas of the brain by either
retaining 
similar 
morphology 
and
function, or diversifying it.[55][56]
Anatomically, the reptilian brain has less subdivisions than the mammalian brain, however it has numerous
conserved aspects including the organization of the spinal cord and cranial nerve, as well as elaborated
brain pattern of organization.[59] Elaborated brains are characterized by migrated neuronal cell bodies away
Brains of an emu, a kiwi, a barn owl, and a pigeon,
with visual processing areas labelled
from the periventricular matrix, region of neuronal development, forming organized nuclear groups.[59]
Aside from reptiles and mammals, other vertebrates with elaborated brains include hagfish, galeomorph
sharks, skates, rays, teleosts, and birds.[59] Overall elaborated brains are subdivided in forebrain, midbrain,
and hindbrain.
The hindbrain coordinates and integrates sensory and motor inputs and outputs responsible for, but not
limited to, walking, swimming, or flying. It contains input and output axons interconnecting the spinal cord,
midbrain and forebrain transmitting information from the external and internal environments.[59] The
midbrain links sensory, motor, and integrative components received from the hindbrain, connecting it to the
forebrain. The tectum, which includes the optic tectum and torus semicircularis, receives auditory, visual,
and somatosensory inputs, forming integrated maps of the sensory and visual space around the animal.[59]
The tegmentum receives incoming sensory information and forwards motor responses to and from the
forebrain. The isthmus connects the hindbrain with midbrain. The forebrain region is particularly well
developed, is further divided into diencephalon and telencephalon. Diencephalon is related to regulation of
eye and body movement in response to visual stimuli, sensory information, circadian rhythms, olfactory
input, and autonomic nervous system.Telencephalon is related to control of movements, neurotransmitters
and neuromodulators responsible for integrating inputs and transmitting outputs are present, sensory
systems, and cognitive functions.[59]
The avian brain is the central organ of the nervous
system in birds. Birds possess large, complex brains,
which process, integrate, and coordinate information
received from the environment and make decisions on
how to respond with the rest of the body. Like in all
chordates, the avian brain is contained within the skull
bones of the head.
The bird brain is divided into a number of sections,
each with a different function. The cerebrum or
telencephalon is divided into two hemispheres, and
controls higher functions. The telencephalon is
dominated by a large pallium, which corresponds to
the mammalian cerebral cortex and is responsible for
the cognitive functions of birds. The pallium is made up of several major structures: the hyperpallium, a
dorsal bulge of the pallium found only in birds, as well as the nidopallium, mesopallium, and archipallium.
The bird telencephalon nuclear structure, wherein neurons are distributed in three-dimensionally arranged
clusters, with no large-scale separation of white matter and grey matter, though there exist layer-like and
column-like connections. Structures in the pallium are associated with perception, learning, and cognition.
Beneath the pallium are the two components of the subpallium, the striatum and pallidum. The subpallium
connects different parts of the telencephalon and plays major roles in a number of critical behaviours. To the
rear of the telencephalon are the thalamus, midbrain, and cerebellum. The hindbrain connects the rest of the
brain to the spinal cord.
The size and structure of the avian brain enables prominent behaviours of birds such as flight and
vocalization. Dedicated structures and pathways integrate the auditory and visual senses, strong in most
species of birds, as well as the typically weaker olfactory and tactile senses. Social behaviour, widespread
Birds
Encephalization Quotient
Species
EQ[64]
Human
7.4–7.8
Common chimpanzee
2.2–2.5
Rhesus monkey
2.1
Bottlenose dolphin
4.14[65]
Elephant
1.13–2.36[66]
Dog
1.2
Horse
0.9
Rat
0.4
among birds, depends on the organisation and functions of the brain. Some birds exhibit strong abilities of
cognition, enabled by the unique structure and physiology of the avian brain.
The most obvious difference between the brains of mammals and other vertebrates is their size. On average,
a mammal has a brain roughly twice as large as that of a bird of the same body size, and ten times as large
as that of a reptile of the same body size.[60]
Size, however, is not the only difference: there are also substantial differences in shape. The hindbrain and
midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates, but dramatic differences appear in
the forebrain, which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure.[61] The cerebral cortex is the part of the
brain that most strongly distinguishes mammals. In non-mammalian vertebrates, the surface of the cerebrum
is lined with a comparatively simple three-layered structure called the pallium. In mammals, the pallium
evolves into a complex six-layered structure called neocortex or isocortex.[62] Several areas at the edge of
the neocortex, including the hippocampus and amygdala, are also much more extensively developed in
mammals than in other vertebrates.[61]
The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas. The superior colliculus,
which plays a major role in visual control of behavior in most vertebrates, shrinks to a small size in
mammals, and many of its functions are taken over by visual areas of the cerebral cortex.[60] The
cerebellum of mammals contains a large portion (the neocerebellum) dedicated to supporting the cerebral
cortex, which has no counterpart in other vertebrates.[63]
The brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures
as the brains of other mammals, but are generally larger in
proportion to body size.[67] The encephalization quotient (EQ) is
used to compare brain sizes across species. It takes into account the
nonlinearity of the brain-to-body relationship.[64] Humans have an
average EQ in the 7-to-8 range, while most other primates have an
EQ in the 2-to-3 range. Dolphins have values higher than those of
primates other than humans,[65] but nearly all other mammals have
EQ values that are substantially lower.
Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive
expansion of the cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex and
the parts of the cortex involved in vision.[68] The visual processing
network of primates includes at least 30 distinguishable brain areas,
with a complex web of interconnections. It has been estimated that
visual processing areas occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate neocortex.[69] The
prefrontal cortex carries out functions that include planning, working memory, motivation, attention, and
executive control. It takes up a much larger proportion of the brain for primates than for other species, and
an especially large fraction of the human brain.[70]
Mammals
Primates
Development
Brain of a human embryo in the sixth week of
development
The brain develops in an intricately orchestrated
sequence of stages.[71] It changes in shape from a
simple swelling at the front of the nerve cord in the
earliest embryonic stages, to a complex array of areas
and connections. Neurons are created in special zones
that contain stem cells, and then migrate through the
tissue to reach their ultimate locations. Once neurons
have positioned themselves, their axons sprout and
navigate through the brain, branching and extending as
they go, until the tips reach their targets and form
synaptic connections. In a number of parts of the
nervous system, neurons and synapses are produced in
excessive numbers during the early stages, and then the
unneeded ones are pruned away.[71]
For vertebrates, the early stages of neural development are similar across all species.[71] As the embryo
transforms from a round blob of cells into a wormlike structure, a narrow strip of ectoderm running along
the midline of the back is induced to become the neural plate, the precursor of the nervous system. The
neural plate folds inward to form the neural groove, and then the lips that line the groove merge to enclose
the neural tube, a hollow cord of cells with a fluid-filled ventricle at the center. At the front end, the
ventricles and cord swell to form three vesicles that are the precursors of the prosencephalon (forebrain),
mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). At the next stage, the forebrain splits into
two vesicles called the telencephalon (which will contain the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related
structures) and the diencephalon (which will contain the thalamus and hypothalamus). At about the same
time, the hindbrain splits into the metencephalon (which will contain the cerebellum and pons) and the
myelencephalon (which will contain the medulla oblongata). Each of these areas contains proliferative
zones where neurons and glial cells are generated; the resulting cells then migrate, sometimes for long
distances, to their final positions.[71]
Once a neuron is in place, it extends dendrites and an axon into the area around it. Axons, because they
commonly extend a great distance from the cell body and need to reach specific targets, grow in a
particularly complex way. The tip of a growing axon consists of a blob of protoplasm called a growth cone,
studded with chemical receptors. These receptors sense the local environment, causing the growth cone to
be attracted or repelled by various cellular elements, and thus to be pulled in a particular direction at each
point along its path. The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the
brain until it reaches its destination area, where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses.
Considering the entire brain, thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding.[71]
The synaptic network that finally emerges is only partly determined by genes, though. In many parts of the
brain, axons initially "overgrow", and then are "pruned" by mechanisms that depend on neural activity.[71]
In the projection from the eye to the midbrain, for example, the structure in the adult contains a very precise
mapping, connecting each point on the surface of the retina to a corresponding point in a midbrain layer. In
the first stages of development, each axon from the retina is guided to the right general vicinity in the
midbrain by chemical cues, but then branches very profusely and makes initial contact with a wide swath of
midbrain neurons. The retina, before birth, contains special mechanisms that cause it to generate waves of
activity that originate spontaneously at a random point and then propagate slowly across the retinal layer.
These waves are useful because they cause neighboring neurons to be active at the same time; that is, they
produce a neural activity pattern that contains information about the spatial arrangement of the neurons.
This information is exploited in the midbrain by a mechanism that causes synapses to weaken, and
eventually vanish, if activity in an axon is not followed by activity of the target cell. The result of this
sophisticated process is a gradual tuning and tightening of the map, leaving it finally in its precise adult
form.[72]
Similar things happen in other brain areas: an initial synaptic matrix is generated as a result of genetically
determined chemical guidance, but then gradually refined by activity-dependent mechanisms, partly driven
by internal dynamics, partly by external sensory inputs. In some cases, as with the retina-midbrain system,
activity patterns depend on mechanisms that operate only in the developing brain, and apparently exist
solely to guide development.[72]
In humans and many other mammals, new neurons are created mainly before birth, and the infant brain
contains substantially more neurons than the adult brain.[71] There are, however, a few areas where new
neurons continue to be generated throughout life. The two areas for which adult neurogenesis is well
established are the olfactory bulb, which is involved in the sense of smell, and the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus, where there is evidence that the new neurons play a role in storing newly acquired memories.
With these exceptions, however, the set of neurons that is present in early childhood is the set that is present
for life. Glial cells are different: as with most types of cells in the body, they are generated throughout the
lifespan.[73]
There has long been debate about whether the qualities of mind, personality, and intelligence can be
attributed to heredity or to upbringing.[74] Although many details remain to be settled, neuroscience shows
that both factors are important. Genes determine both the general form of the brain and how it reacts to
experience, but experience is required to refine the matrix of synaptic connections, resulting in greatly
increased complexity. The presence or absence of experience is critical at key periods of development.[75]
Additionally, the quantity and quality of experience are important. For example, animals raised in enriched
environments demonstrate thick cerebral cortices, indicating a high density of synaptic connections,
compared to animals with restricted levels of stimulation.[76]
The functions of the brain depend on the ability of neurons to transmit electrochemical signals to other cells,
and their ability to respond appropriately to electrochemical signals received from other cells. The electrical
properties of neurons are controlled by a wide variety of biochemical and metabolic processes, most notably
the interactions between neurotransmitters and receptors that take place at synapses.[8]
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that are released at synapses when the local membrane is depolarised and
Ca2+ enters into the cell, typically when an action potential arrives at the synapse – neurotransmitters attach
themselves to receptor molecules on the membrane of the synapse's target cell (or cells), and thereby alter
the electrical or chemical properties of the receptor molecules. With few exceptions, each neuron in the
brain releases the same chemical neurotransmitter, or combination of neurotransmitters, at all the synaptic
connections it makes with other neurons; this rule is known as Dale's principle.[8] Thus, a neuron can be
Physiology
Neurotransmitters and receptors
Brain electrical activity recorded from
a human patient during an epileptic
seizure
characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases. The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their
effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems. This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids, nicotine,
heroin, cocaine, alcohol, fluoxetine, chlorpromazine, and many others.[77]
The two neurotransmitters that are most widely found in the vertebrate brain are glutamate, which almost
always exerts excitatory effects on target neurons, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is almost
always inhibitory. Neurons using these transmitters can be found in nearly every part of the brain.[78]
Because of their ubiquity, drugs that act on glutamate or GABA tend to have broad and powerful effects.
Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate; most tranquilizers exert their sedative
effects by enhancing the effects of GABA.[79]
There are dozens of other chemical neurotransmitters that are used in more limited areas of the brain, often
areas dedicated to a particular function. Serotonin, for example—the primary target of many antidepressant
drugs and many dietary aids—comes exclusively from a small brainstem area called the raphe nuclei.[80]
Norepinephrine, which is involved in arousal, comes exclusively from a nearby small area called the locus
coeruleus.[81] Other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine have multiple sources in the
brain but are not as ubiquitously distributed as glutamate and GABA.[82]
As a side effect of the electrochemical processes used by neurons
for signaling, brain tissue generates electric fields when it is active.
When large numbers of neurons show synchronized activity, the
electric fields that they generate can be large enough to detect
outside the skull, using electroencephalography (EEG)[83] or
magnetoencephalography (MEG). EEG recordings, along with
recordings made from electrodes implanted inside the brains of
animals such as rats, show that the brain of a living animal is
constantly active, even during sleep.[84] Each part of the brain
shows a mixture of rhythmic and nonrhythmic activity, which may
vary according to behavioral state. In mammals, the cerebral cortex
tends to show large slow delta waves during sleep, faster alpha
waves when the animal is awake but inattentive, and chaotic-
looking irregular activity when the animal is actively engaged in a
task, called beta and gamma waves. During an epileptic seizure, the
brain's inhibitory control mechanisms fail to function and electrical
activity rises to pathological levels, producing EEG traces that show large wave and spike patterns not seen
in a healthy brain. Relating these population-level patterns to the computational functions of individual
neurons is a major focus of current research in neurophysiology.[84]
All vertebrates have a blood–brain barrier that allows metabolism inside the brain to operate differently from
metabolism in other parts of the body. The neurovascular unit regulates cerebral blood flow so that activated
neurons can be supplied with energy. Glial cells play a major role in brain metabolism by controlling the
chemical composition of the fluid that surrounds neurons, including levels of ions and nutrients.[85]
Electrical activity
Metabolism
Model of a neural circuit in the
cerebellum, as proposed by James
S. Albus
Diagram of signal processing in the
auditory system
Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume, so large brains place severe
metabolic demands on animals. The need to limit body weight in order, for example, to fly, has apparently
led to selection for a reduction of brain size in some species, such as bats.[86] Most of the brain's energy
consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge (membrane potential) of neurons.[85] Most vertebrate
species devote between 2% and 8% of basal metabolism to the brain. In primates, however, the percentage
is much higher—in humans it rises to 20–25%.[87] The energy consumption of the brain does not vary
greatly over time, but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive
regions; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods of PET, fMRI,[88] and NIRS.[89] The
brain typically gets most of its energy from oxygen-dependent metabolism of glucose (i.e., blood sugar),[85]
but ketones provide a major alternative source, together with contributions from medium chain fatty acids
(caprylic and heptanoic acids),[90][91] lactate,[92] acetate,[93] and possibly amino acids.[94]
Information from the sense organs is collected in the brain. There it
is used to determine what actions the organism is to take. The brain
processes the raw data to extract information about the structure of
the environment. Next it combines the processed information with
information about the current needs of the animal and with memory
of past circumstances. Finally, on the basis of the results, it
generates motor response patterns. These signal-processing tasks
require intricate interplay between a variety of functional
subsystems.[95]
The function of the brain is to provide coherent control over the
actions of an animal. A centralized brain allows groups of muscles
to be co-activated in complex patterns; it also allows stimuli
impinging on one part of the body to evoke responses in other parts,
and it can prevent different parts of the body from acting at cross-purposes to each other.[95]
The human brain is provided with information about light, sound,
the chemical composition of the atmosphere, temperature, the
position of the body in space (proprioception), the chemical
composition of the bloodstream, and more. In other animals
additional senses are present, such as the infrared heat-sense of
snakes, the magnetic field sense of some birds, or the electric field
sense mainly seen in aquatic animals.
Each sensory system begins with specialized receptor cells,[8] such
as photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye, or vibration-sensitive
hair cells in the cochlea of the ear. The axons of sensory receptor
cells travel into the spinal cord or brain, where they transmit their
signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific
sensory modality. This primary sensory nucleus sends information to higher-order sensory areas that are
Function
Perception
dedicated to the same modality. Eventually, via a way-station in the thalamus, the signals are sent to the
cerebral cortex, where they are processed to extract the relevant features, and integrated with signals coming
from other sensory systems.[8]
Motor systems are areas of the brain that are involved in initiating body movements, that is, in activating
muscles. Except for the muscles that control the eye, which are driven by nuclei in the midbrain, all the
voluntary muscles in the body are directly innervated by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain.[8]
Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord, and by inputs that
descend from the brain. The intrinsic spinal circuits implement many reflex responses, and contain pattern
generators for rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming. The descending connections from the
brain allow for more sophisticated control.[8]
The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord. At the lowest level are motor
areas in the medulla and pons, which control stereotyped movements such as walking, breathing, or
swallowing. At a higher level are areas in the midbrain, such as the red nucleus, which is responsible for
coordinating movements of the arms and legs. At a higher level yet is the primary motor cortex, a strip of
tissue located at the posterior edge of the frontal lobe. The primary motor cortex sends projections to the
subcortical motor areas, but also sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the
pyramidal tract. This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of
movements. Other motor-related brain areas exert secondary effects by projecting to the primary motor
areas. Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, basal
ganglia, and cerebellum.[8] In addition to all of the above, the brain and spinal cord contain extensive
circuitry to control the autonomic nervous system which controls the movement of the smooth muscle of the
body.[8]
Major areas involved in controlling movement
Area
Location
Function
Ventral horn
Spinal cord
Contains motor neurons that directly activate muscles[96]
Oculomotor nuclei
Midbrain
Contains motor neurons that directly activate the eye
muscles[97]
Cerebellum
Hindbrain
Calibrates precision and timing of movements[8]
Basal ganglia
Forebrain
Action selection on the basis of motivation[98]
Motor cortex
Frontal lobe
Direct cortical activation of spinal motor circuits[99]
Premotor cortex
Frontal lobe
Groups elementary movements into coordinated patterns[8]
Supplementary motor
area
Frontal lobe
Sequences movements into temporal patterns[100]
Prefrontal cortex
Frontal lobe
Planning and other executive functions[101]
Many animals alternate between sleeping and waking in a daily cycle. Arousal and alertness are also
modulated on a finer time scale by a network of brain areas.[8] A key component of the sleep system is the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a tiny part of the hypothalamus located directly above the point at which
Motor control
Sleep
Cross-section of a human head,
showing location of the
hypothalamus
the optic nerves from the two eyes cross. The SCN contains the body's central biological clock. Neurons
there show activity levels that rise and fall with a period of about 24 hours, circadian rhythms: these activity
fluctuations are driven by rhythmic changes in expression of a set of "clock genes". The SCN continues to
keep time even if it is excised from the brain and placed in a dish of warm nutrient solution, but it ordinarily
receives input from the optic nerves, through the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT), that allows daily light-
dark cycles to calibrate the clock.[102]
The SCN projects to a set of areas in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and midbrain that are involved in
implementing sleep-wake cycles. An important component of the system is the reticular formation, a group
of neuron-clusters scattered diffusely through the core of the lower brain. Reticular neurons send signals to
the thalamus, which in turn sends activity-level-controlling signals to every part of the cortex. Damage to
the reticular formation can produce a permanent state of coma.[8]
Sleep involves great changes in brain activity.[8] Until the 1950s it was generally believed that the brain
essentially shuts off during sleep,[103] but this is now known to be far from true; activity continues, but
patterns become very different. There are two types of sleep: REM sleep (with dreaming) and NREM (non-
REM, usually without dreaming) sleep, which repeat in slightly varying patterns throughout a sleep
episode. Three broad types of distinct brain activity patterns can be measured: REM, light NREM and deep
NREM. During deep NREM sleep, also called slow wave sleep, activity in the cortex takes the form of
large synchronized waves, whereas in the waking state it is noisy and desynchronized. Levels of the
neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin drop during slow wave sleep, and fall almost to zero during
REM sleep; levels of acetylcholine show the reverse pattern.[8]
For any animal, survival requires maintaining a variety of
parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation: these
include temperature, water content, salt concentration in the
bloodstream, blood glucose levels, blood oxygen level, and
others.[104] The ability of an animal to regulate the internal
environment of its body—the milieu intérieur, as the pioneering
physiologist Claude Bernard called it—is known as homeostasis
(Greek for "standing still").[105] Maintaining homeostasis is a
crucial function of the brain. The basic principle that underlies
homeostasis is negative feedback: any time a parameter diverges
from its set-point, sensors generate an error signal that evokes a
response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum
value.[104] (This principle is widely used in engineering, for example in the control of temperature using a
thermostat.)
In vertebrates, the part of the brain that plays the greatest role is the hypothalamus, a small region at the base
of the forebrain whose size does not reflect its complexity or the importance of its function.[104] The
hypothalamus is a collection of small nuclei, most of which are involved in basic biological functions. Some
of these functions relate to arousal or to social interactions such as sexuality, aggression, or maternal
behaviors; but many of them relate to homeostasis. Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors
located in the lining of blood vessels, conveying information about temperature, sodium level, glucose level,
blood oxygen level, and other parameters. These hypothalamic nuclei send output signals to motor areas
Homeostasis
Components of the basal ganglia, shown in two cross-
sections of the human brain. Blue: caudate nucleus and
putamen. Green: globus pallidus. Red: subthalamic
nucleus. Black: substantia nigra.
that can generate actions to rectify deficiencies. Some of the outputs also go to the pituitary gland, a tiny
gland attached to the brain directly underneath the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland secretes hormones
into the bloodstream, where they circulate throughout the body and induce changes in cellular activity.[106]
The individual animals need to express
survival-promoting behaviors, such as seeking
food, water, shelter, and a mate.[107] The
motivational system in the brain monitors the
current state of satisfaction of these goals, and
activates behaviors to meet any needs that
arise. The motivational system works largely
by a reward–punishment mechanism. When a
particular behavior is followed by favorable
consequences, the reward mechanism in the
brain is activated, which induces structural
changes inside the brain that cause the same
behavior to be repeated later, whenever a
similar situation arises. Conversely, when a behavior is followed by unfavorable consequences, the brain's
punishment mechanism is activated, inducing structural changes that cause the behavior to be suppressed
when similar situations arise in the future.[108]
Most organisms studied to date use a reward–punishment mechanism: for instance, worms and insects can
alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers.[109] In vertebrates, the reward-punishment
system is implemented by a specific set of brain structures, at the heart of which lie the basal ganglia, a set
of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain.[47] The basal ganglia are the central site at which
decisions are made: the basal ganglia exert a sustained inhibitory control over most of the motor systems in
the brain; when this inhibition is released, a motor system is permitted to execute the action it is
programmed to carry out. Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs
that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted. The reward mechanism is better
understood than the punishment mechanism, because its role in drug abuse has caused it to be studied very
intensively. Research has shown that the neurotransmitter dopamine plays a central role: addictive drugs
such as cocaine, amphetamine, and nicotine either cause dopamine levels to rise or cause the effects of
dopamine inside the brain to be enhanced.[110]
Almost all animals are capable of modifying their behavior as a result of experience—even the most
primitive types of worms. Because behavior is driven by brain activity, changes in behavior must somehow
correspond to changes inside the brain. Already in the late 19th century theorists like Santiago Ramón y
Cajal argued that the most plausible explanation is that learning and memory are expressed as changes in
the synaptic connections between neurons.[111] Until 1970, however, experimental evidence to support the
synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking. In 1971 Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo published a paper on a
phenomenon now called long-term potentiation: the paper showed clear evidence of activity-induced
synaptic changes that lasted for at least several days.[112] Since then technical advances have made these
sorts of experiments much easier to carry out, and thousands of studies have been made that have clarified
Motivation
Learning and memory
The Human Brain Project is a large
scientific research project, starting in
2013, which aims to simulate the
complete human brain.
the mechanism of synaptic change, and uncovered other types of activity-driven synaptic change in a
variety of brain areas, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, and cerebellum.[113]
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and physical activity appear to play a beneficial role in the
process.[114]
Neuroscientists currently distinguish several types of learning and memory that are implemented by the
brain in distinct ways:
Working memory is the ability of the brain to maintain a temporary representation of
information about the task that an animal is currently engaged in. This sort of dynamic
memory is thought to be mediated by the formation of cell assemblies—groups of activated
neurons that maintain their activity by constantly stimulating one another.[115]
Episodic memory is the ability to remember the details of specific events. This sort of
memory can last for a lifetime. Much evidence implicates the hippocampus in playing a
crucial role: people with severe damage to the hippocampus sometimes show amnesia, that
is, inability to form new long-lasting episodic memories.[116]
Semantic memory is the ability to learn facts and relationships. This sort of memory is
probably stored largely in the cerebral cortex, mediated by changes in connections between
cells that represent specific types of information.[117]
Instrumental learning is the ability for rewards and punishments to modify behavior. It is
implemented by a network of brain areas centered on the basal ganglia.[118]
Motor learning is the ability to refine patterns of body movement by practicing, or more
generally by repetition. A number of brain areas are involved, including the premotor cortex,
basal ganglia, and especially the cerebellum, which functions as a large memory bank for
microadjustments of the parameters of movement.[119]
The field of neuroscience encompasses all approaches that seek to
understand the brain and the rest of the nervous system.[8]
Psychology seeks to understand mind and behavior, and neurology
is the medical discipline that diagnoses and treats diseases of the
nervous system. The brain is also the most important organ studied
in psychiatry, the branch of medicine that works to study, prevent,
and treat mental disorders.[120] Cognitive science seeks to unify
neuroscience and psychology with other fields that concern
themselves with the brain, such as computer science (artificial
intelligence and similar fields) and philosophy.[121]
The oldest method of studying the brain is anatomical, and until the
middle of the 20th century, much of the progress in neuroscience
came from the development of better cell stains and better
microscopes. Neuroanatomists study the large-scale structure of the brain as well as the microscopic
structure of neurons and their components, especially synapses. Among other tools, they employ a plethora
of stains that reveal neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity. In recent years, the development of
immunostaining techniques has allowed investigation of neurons that express specific sets of genes. Also,
functional neuroanatomy uses medical imaging techniques to correlate variations in human brain structure
with differences in cognition or behavior.[122]
Research
Design of an experiment in which brain activity
from a monkey was used to control a robotic
arm[126]
Neurophysiologists study the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain: their primary
tools are drugs and recording devices. Thousands of experimentally developed drugs affect the nervous
system, some in highly specific ways. Recordings of brain activity can be made using electrodes, either
glued to the scalp as in EEG studies, or implanted inside the brains of animals for extracellular recordings,
which can detect action potentials generated by individual neurons.[123] Because the brain does not contain
pain receptors, it is possible using these techniques to record brain activity from animals that are awake and
behaving without causing distress. The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity
in human patients with intractable epilepsy, in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant
electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures.[124] Functional imaging techniques
such as fMRI are also used to study brain activity; these techniques have mainly been used with human
subjects, because they require a conscious subject to remain motionless for long periods of time, but they
have the great advantage of being noninvasive.[125]
Another approach to brain function is to examine the
consequences of damage to specific brain areas. Even
though it is protected by the skull and meninges,
surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from
the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, the delicate
nature of the brain makes it vulnerable to numerous
diseases and several types of damage. In humans, the
effects of strokes and other types of brain damage have
been a key source of information about brain function.
Because there is no ability to experimentally control
the nature of the damage, however, this information is
often difficult to interpret. In animal studies, most
commonly involving rats, it is possible to use
electrodes or locally injected chemicals to produce
precise patterns of damage and then examine the consequences for behavior.[127]
Computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first, the use of computers to study the brain;
second, the study of how brains perform computation. On one hand, it is possible to write a computer
program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that
describe their electrochemical activity; such simulations are known as biologically realistic neural networks.
On the other hand, it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating, or mathematically
analyzing, the operations of simplified "units" that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out
much of their biological complexity. The computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer
scientists and neuroscientists.[128]
Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the study and development of dynamic neuronal
models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes.
Recent years have seen increasing applications of genetic and genomic techniques to the study of the brain
[129] and a focus on the roles of neurotrophic factors and physical activity in neuroplasticity.[114] The most
common subjects are mice, because of the availability of technical tools. It is now possible with relative ease
to "knock out" or mutate a wide variety of genes, and then examine the effects on brain function. More
sophisticated approaches are also being used: for example, using Cre-Lox recombination it is possible to
activate or deactivate genes in specific parts of the brain, at specific times.[129]
Illustration by René Descartes of
how the brain implements a reflex
response
Recent years have also seen rapid advances in single-cell sequencing technologies, and these have been
used to leverage the cellular heterogeneity of the brain as a means of better understanding the roles of
distinct cell types in disease and biology (as well as how genomic variants influence individual cell types).
In 2024, investigators studied a large integrated dataset of almost 3 million nuclei from the human prefrontal
cortext from 388 individuals.[130] In doing so, they annotated 28 cell types to evaluate expression and
chromatin variation across gene families and drug targets. They identified about half a million cell type–
specific regulatory elements and about 1.5 million single-cell expression quantitative trait loci (ie, genomic
variants with strong statistical associations with changes in gene expression within specific cell types),
which were then used to build cell-type regulatory networks (the study also describes cell-to-cell
communication networks). These networks were found to manifest cellular changes in aging and
neuropsychiatric disorders. As part of the same same investigation, a machine learning model was designed
to accurately impute single-cell expression (this model prioritized ~250 disease-risk genes and drug targets
with associated cell types).
The oldest brain to have been discovered was in Armenia in the
Areni-1 cave complex. The brain, estimated to be over 5,000 years
old, was found in the skull of a 12 to 14-year-old girl. Although the
brains were shriveled, they were well preserved due to the climate
found inside the cave.[131]
Early philosophers were divided as to whether the seat of the soul
lies in the brain or heart. Aristotle favored the heart, and thought
that the function of the brain was merely to cool the blood.
Democritus, the inventor of the atomic theory of matter, argued for
a three-part soul, with intellect in the head, emotion in the heart, and
lust near the liver.[132] The unknown author of On the Sacred
Disease, a medical treatise in the Hippocratic Corpus, came down
unequivocally in favor of the brain, writing:
Men ought to know that from nothing else but the brain
come joys, delights, laughter and sports, and sorrows,
griefs, despondency, and lamentations. ... And by the
same organ we become mad and delirious, and fears and
terrors assail us, some by night, and some by day, and
dreams and untimely wanderings, and cares that are not
suitable, and ignorance of present circumstances,
desuetude, and unskillfulness. All these things we endure
from the brain, when it is not healthy...
— 
On the Sacred Disease, attributed to
Hippocrates[133]
The Roman physician Galen also argued for the importance of the brain, and theorized in some depth about
how it might work. Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain, nerves, and muscles,
demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of
History
Andreas Vesalius' Fabrica,
published in 1543, showing
the base of the human brain,
including optic chiasma,
cerebellum, olfactory bulbs,
etc.
Drawing by Santiago Ramón y Cajal
of two types of Golgi-stained neurons
from the cerebellum of a pigeon
nerves. He postulated that nerves activate muscles mechanically by carrying
a mysterious substance he called pneumata psychikon, usually translated as
"animal spirits".[132] Galen's ideas were widely known during the Middle
Ages, but not much further progress came until the Renaissance, when
detailed anatomical study resumed, combined with the theoretical
speculations of René Descartes and those who followed him. Descartes,
like Galen, thought of the nervous system in hydraulic terms. He believed
that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical res
cogitans, but that the majority of behaviors of humans, and all behaviors of
animals, could be explained mechanistically.[132]
The first real progress toward a modern understanding of nervous function,
though, came from the investigations of Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), who
discovered that a shock of static electricity applied to an exposed nerve of a
dead frog could cause its leg to contract. Since that time, each major
advance in understanding has followed more or less directly from the
development of a new technique of investigation. Until the early years of
the 20th century, the most important advances were derived from new methods for staining cells.[134]
Particularly critical was the invention of the Golgi stain, which (when correctly used) stains only a small
fraction of neurons, but stains them in their entirety, including cell body, dendrites, and axon. Without such
a stain, brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers, in which it
is impossible to determine any structure. In the hands of Camillo Golgi, and especially of the Spanish
neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the new stain revealed hundreds of distinct types of neurons, each
with its own unique dendritic structure and pattern of connectivity.[135]
In the first half of the 20th century, advances in electronics enabled
investigation of the electrical properties of nerve cells, culminating
in work by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley, and others on the
biophysics of the action potential, and the work of Bernard Katz
and others on the electrochemistry of the synapse.[136] These
studies complemented the anatomical picture with a conception of
the brain as a dynamic entity. Reflecting the new understanding, in
1942 Charles Sherrington visualized the workings of the brain
waking from sleep:
The great topmost sheet of the mass, that where hardly a
light had twinkled or moved, becomes now a sparkling
field of rhythmic flashing points with trains of traveling
sparks hurrying hither and thither. The brain is waking
and with it the mind is returning. It is as if the Milky Way
entered upon some cosmic dance. Swiftly the head mass
becomes an enchanted loom where millions of flashing
shuttles weave a dissolving pattern, always a meaningful
pattern though never an abiding one; a shifting harmony
of subpatterns.
— 
Sherrington, 1942, Man on his Nature[137]
The invention of electronic computers in the 1940s, along with the development of mathematical
information theory, led to a realization that brains can potentially be understood as information processing
systems. This concept formed the basis of the field of cybernetics, and eventually gave rise to the field now
known as computational neuroscience.[138] The earliest attempts at cybernetics were somewhat crude in
that they treated the brain as essentially a digital computer in disguise, as for example in John von
Neumann's 1958 book, The Computer and the Brain.[139] Over the years, though, accumulating
information about the electrical responses of brain cells recorded from behaving animals has steadily moved
theoretical concepts in the direction of increasing realism.[138]
One of the most influential early contributions was a 1959 paper titled What the frog's eye tells the frog's
brain: the paper examined the visual responses of neurons in the retina and optic tectum of frogs, and came
to the conclusion that some neurons in the tectum of the frog are wired to combine elementary responses in
a way that makes them function as "bug perceivers".[140] A few years later David Hubel and Torsten
Wiesel discovered cells in the primary visual cortex of monkeys that become active when sharp edges move
across specific points in the field of view—a discovery for which they won a Nobel Prize.[141] Follow-up
studies in higher-order visual areas found cells that detect binocular disparity, color, movement, and aspects
of shape, with areas located at increasing distances from the primary visual cortex showing increasingly
complex responses.[142] Other investigations of brain areas unrelated to vision have revealed cells with a
wide variety of response correlates, some related to memory, some to abstract types of cognition such as
space.[143]
Theorists have worked to understand these response patterns by constructing mathematical models of
neurons and neural networks, which can be simulated using computers.[138] Some useful models are
abstract, focusing on the conceptual structure of neural algorithms rather than the details of how they are
implemented in the brain; other models attempt to incorporate data about the biophysical properties of real
neurons.[144] No model on any level is yet considered to be a fully valid description of brain function,
though. The essential difficulty is that sophisticated computation by neural networks requires distributed
processing in which hundreds or thousands of neurons work cooperatively—current methods of brain
activity recording are only capable of isolating action potentials from a few dozen neurons at a time.[145]
Furthermore, even single neurons appear to be complex and capable of performing computations.[146] So,
brain models that do not reflect this are too abstract to be representative of brain operation; models that do
try to capture this are very computationally expensive and arguably intractable with present computational
resources. However, the Human Brain Project is trying to build a realistic, detailed computational model of
the entire human brain. The wisdom of this approach has been publicly contested, with high-profile
scientists on both sides of the argument.
In the second half of the 20th century, developments in chemistry, electron microscopy, genetics, computer
science, functional brain imaging, and other fields progressively opened new windows into brain structure
and function. In the United States, the 1990s were officially designated as the "Decade of the Brain" to
commemorate advances made in brain research, and to promote funding for such research.[147]
Gulai otak, beef brain curry from
Indonesia
In the 21st century, these trends have continued, and several new approaches have come into prominence,
including multielectrode recording, which allows the activity of many brain cells to be recorded all at the
same time;[148] genetic engineering, which allows molecular components of the brain to be altered
experimentally;[129] genomics, which allows variations in brain structure to be correlated with variations in
DNA properties and neuroimaging.[149]
Animal brains are used as food in numerous cuisines.
Some archaeological evidence suggests that the mourning rituals of
European Neanderthals also involved the consumption of the
brain.[150]
The Fore people of Papua New Guinea are known to eat human
brains. In funerary rituals, those close to the dead would eat the
brain of the deceased to create a sense of immortality. A prion
disease called kuru has been traced to this.[151]
Philosophy portal
Brain–computer interface
Central nervous system disease
List of neuroscience databases
Neurological disorder
Optogenetics
Outline of neuroscience
Aging brain
1. Saladin, Kenneth (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill. p. 416. ISBN 978-0-07-
122207-5.
2. von Bartheld, CS; Bahney, J; Herculano-Houzel, S (15 December 2016). "The search for true
numbers of neurons and glial cells in the human brain: A review of 150 years of cell
counting" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5063692). The Journal of
Comparative Neurology. 524 (18): 3865–3895. doi:10.1002/cne.24040 (https://doi.org/10.100
2%2Fcne.24040). PMC 5063692 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5063692).
PMID 27187682 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27187682).
Society and culture
As food
In rituals
See also
References
3. Yuste, Rafael; Church, George M. (March 2014). "The new century of the brain" (https://web.
archive.org/web/20140714190157/http://www.columbia.edu/cu/biology/faculty/yuste/Publicat
ions/Yuste_Church_SciAm14.pdf) (PDF). Scientific American. 310 (3): 38–45.
Bibcode:2014SciAm.310c..38Y (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014SciAm.310c..38Y).
doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0314-38 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fscientificamerican0314-3
8). PMID 24660326 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24660326). Archived from the original
(http://www.columbia.edu/cu/biology/faculty/yuste/Publications/Yuste_Church_SciAm14.pdf)
(PDF) on 2014-07-14.
4. Shepherd, GM (1994). Neurobiology (https://archive.org/details/neurobiology00shep/page/
3). Oxford University Press. p. 3 (https://archive.org/details/neurobiology00shep/page/3).
ISBN 978-0-19-508843-4.
5. Sporns, O (2010). Networks of the Brain (https://books.google.com/books?id=v1DBKE7-UrY
C&pg=PA143). MIT Press. p. 143. ISBN 978-0-262-01469-4.
6. Başar, E (2010). Brain-Body-Mind in the Nebulous Cartesian System: A Holistic Approach by
Oscillations (https://books.google.com/books?id=NAbMHo-ux58C&pg=PA225). Springer.
p. 225. ISBN 978-1-4419-6134-1.
7. Singh, Inderbir (2006). "A Brief Review of the Techniques Used in the Study of
Neuroanatomy" (https://books.google.com/books?id=OzgmngAACAAJ). Textbook of Human
Neuroanatomy (7th ed.). Jaypee Brothers. p. 24. ISBN 978-81-8061-808-6.
8. Kandel, Eric R.; Schwartz, James Harris; Jessell, Thomas M. (2000). Principles of neural
science (https://archive.org/details/isbn_9780838577011) (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1. OCLC 42073108 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/42073108).
9. Douglas, RJ; Martin, KA (2004). "Neuronal circuits of the neocortex". Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 27: 419–451. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144152 (https://doi.org/1
0.1146%2Fannurev.neuro.27.070203.144152). PMID 15217339 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/15217339).
10. Barnett, MW; Larkman, PM (2007). "The action potential". Practical Neurology. 7 (3): 192–
197. PMID 17515599 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17515599).
11. Shepherd, Gordon M. (2004). "1. Introduction to synaptic circuits". The Synaptic Organization
of the Brain (https://books.google.com/books?id=rfcRDAAAQBAJ) (5th ed.). New York, New
York: Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-515956-1.
12. Williams, RW; Herrup, K (1988). "The control of neuron number". Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 11: 423–453. doi:10.1146/annurev.ne.11.030188.002231 (https://doi.org/10.1
146%2Fannurev.ne.11.030188.002231). PMID 3284447 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32
84447).
13. Heisenberg, M (2003). "Mushroom body memoir: from maps to models". Nature Reviews
Neuroscience. 4 (4): 266–275. doi:10.1038/nrn1074 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrn1074).
PMID 12671643 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12671643). S2CID 5038386 (https://api.se
manticscholar.org/CorpusID:5038386).
14. Jacobs, DK; Nakanishi, N; Yuan, D; et al. (2007). "Evolution of sensory structures in basal
metazoa". Integrative and Comparative Biology. 47 (5): 712–723.
CiteSeerX 10.1.1.326.2233 (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.326.2
233). doi:10.1093/icb/icm094 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2Ficm094). PMID 21669752
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21669752).
15. Balavoine, G (2003). "The segmented Urbilateria: A testable scenario" (https://doi.org/10.109
3%2Ficb%2F43.1.137). Integrative and Comparative Biology. 43 (1): 137–147.
doi:10.1093/icb/43.1.137 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2F43.1.137). PMID 21680418 (htt
ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21680418).
16. Schmidt-Rhaesa, A (2007). The Evolution of Organ Systems (https://archive.org/details/evolu
tionorgansy00schm). Oxford University Press. p. 110 (https://archive.org/details/evolutionorg
ansy00schm/page/n120). ISBN 978-0-19-856669-4.
17. Kristan, WB Jr.; Calabrese, RL; Friesen, WO (2005). "Neuronal control of leech behavior".
Prog Neurobiol. 76 (5): 279–327. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2005.09.004 (https://doi.org/10.10
16%2Fj.pneurobio.2005.09.004). PMID 16260077 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1626007
7). S2CID 15773361 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15773361).
18. Barnes, RD (1987). Invertebrate Zoology (5th ed.). Saunders College Pub. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-
03-008914-5.
19. Butler, AB (2000). "Chordate Evolution and the Origin of Craniates: An Old Brain in a New
Head" (https://doi.org/10.1002%2F1097-0185%2820000615%29261%3A3%3C111%3A%3
AAID-AR6%3E3.0.CO%3B2-F). Anatomical Record. 261 (3): 111–125. doi:10.1002/1097-
0185(20000615)261:3<111::AID-AR6>3.0.CO;2-F (https://doi.org/10.1002%2F1097-0185%2
820000615%29261%3A3%3C111%3A%3AAID-AR6%3E3.0.CO%3B2-F). PMID 10867629
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10867629).
20. Bulloch, TH; Kutch, W (1995). "Are the main grades of brains different principally in numbers
of connections or also in quality?" (https://books.google.com/books?id=dW5e6FHOH-4C&pg
=PA439). In Breidbach O (ed.). The nervous systems of invertebrates: an evolutionary and
comparative approach. Birkhäuser. p. 439. ISBN 978-3-7643-5076-5.
21. "Flybrain: An online atlas and database of the drosophila nervous system" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/19980109184708/http://flybrain.neurobio.arizona.edu/). Archived from the original
(http://flybrain.neurobio.arizona.edu) on 1998-01-09. Retrieved 2011-10-14.
22. Konopka, RJ; Benzer, S (1971). "Clock Mutants of Drosophila melanogaster" (https://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC389363). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 68 (9): 2112–2116.
Bibcode:1971PNAS...68.2112K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1971PNAS...68.2112K).
doi:10.1073/pnas.68.9.2112 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.68.9.2112). PMC 389363 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC389363). PMID 5002428 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/5002428).
23. Shin, Hee-Sup; et al. (1985). "An unusual coding sequence from a Drosophila clock gene is
conserved in vertebrates" (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2413365/). Nature. 317 (6036):
445–448. Bibcode:1985Natur.317..445S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985Natur.317..
445S). doi:10.1038/317445a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F317445a0). PMID 2413365 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2413365). S2CID 4372369 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Cor
pusID:4372369).
24. Heisenberg, M; Heusipp, M; Wanke, C. (1995). "Structural plasticity in the Drosophila brain"
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6578107). J. Neurosci. 15 (3): 1951–1960.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-03-01951.1995 (https://doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.15-0
3-01951.1995). PMC 6578107 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6578107).
PMID 7891144 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7891144).
25. Brenner, Sydney (1974). "The Genetics of CAENORHABDITIS ELEGANS" (https://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1213120). Genetics. 77 (1): 71–94.
doi:10.1093/genetics/77.1.71 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fgenetics%2F77.1.71).
PMC 1213120 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1213120). PMID 4366476 (htt
ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4366476).
26. Hobert, O (2005). The C. elegans Research Community (ed.). "Specification of the nervous
system" (http://www.wormbook.org/chapters/www_specnervsys/specnervsys.html).
WormBook: 1–19. doi:10.1895/wormbook.1.12.1 (https://doi.org/10.1895%2Fwormbook.1.12.
1). PMC 4781215 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4781215).
PMID 18050401 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18050401).
27. White, JG; Southgate, E; Thomson, JN; Brenner, S (1986). "The Structure of the Nervous
System of the Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B. 314 (1165): 1–340. Bibcode:1986RSPTB.314....1W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/1986RSPTB.314....1W). doi:10.1098/rstb.1986.0056 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.1
986.0056). PMID 22462104 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22462104).
28. Jabr, Ferris (2012-10-02). "The Connectome Debate: Is Mapping the Mind of a Worm Worth
It?" (http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=c-elegans-connectome). Scientific
American. Retrieved 2014-01-18.
29. Hodgkin J (2001). "Caenorhabditis elegans". In Brenner S, Miller JH (eds.). Encyclopedia of
Genetics. Elsevier. pp. 251–256. ISBN 978-0-12-227080-2.
30. Kandel, ER (2007). In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind (https://
archive.org/details/insearchofmemory0000kand/page/145). WW Norton. pp. 145–150 (http
s://archive.org/details/insearchofmemory0000kand/page/145). ISBN 978-0-393-32937-7.
31. Shu, D.-G.; Conway Morris, S.; Han, J.; Zhang, Z.-F.; Yasui, K.; Janvier, P.; Chen, L.; Zhang,
X.-L.; Liu, J.-N.; et al. (2003). "Head and backbone of the Early Cambrian vertebrate
Haikouichthys". Nature. 421 (6922): 526–529. Bibcode:2003Natur.421..526S (https://ui.adsa
bs.harvard.edu/abs/2003Natur.421..526S). doi:10.1038/nature01264 (https://doi.org/10.103
8%2Fnature01264). PMID 12556891 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12556891).
S2CID 4401274 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4401274).
32. Striedter, GF (2005). "Ch. 3: Conservation in vertebrate brains". Principles of Brain Evolution.
Sinauer Associates. ISBN 978-0-87893-820-9.
33. Armstrong, E (1983). "Relative brain size and metabolism in mammals". Science. 220
(4603): 1302–1304. Bibcode:1983Sci...220.1302A (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983S
ci...220.1302A). doi:10.1126/science.6407108 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.640710
8). PMID 6407108 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6407108).
34. Jerison, Harry J. (1973). Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence (https://books.google.com/bo
oks?id=XFUXAQAAIAAJ). Academic Press. pp. 55–74. ISBN 978-0-12-385250-2.
35. Parent, A; Carpenter, MB (1996). "Ch. 1". Carpenter's Human Neuroanatomy. Williams &
Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-683-06752-1.
36. Pardridge, W (2005). "The Blood-Brain Barrier: Bottleneck in Brain Drug Development" (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC539316). NeuroRx. 2 (1): 3–14.
doi:10.1602/neurorx.2.1.3 (https://doi.org/10.1602%2Fneurorx.2.1.3). PMC 539316 (https://w
ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC539316). PMID 15717053 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/15717053).
37. Northcutt, RG (2008). "Forebrain evolution in bony fishes". Brain Research Bulletin. 75 (2–
4): 191–205. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.058 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.brainresbul
l.2007.10.058). PMID 18331871 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18331871).
S2CID 44619179 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:44619179).
38. Reiner, A; Yamamoto, K; Karten, HJ (2005). "Organization and evolution of the avian
forebrain" (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Far.a.20253). The Anatomical Record Part A:
Discoveries in Molecular, Cellular, and Evolutionary Biology. 287 (1): 1080–1102.
doi:10.1002/ar.a.20253 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Far.a.20253). PMID 16206213 (https://pub
med.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16206213).
39. Siegel, A; Sapru, HN (2010). Essential Neuroscience (https://archive.org/details/essentialne
urosc00sieg). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp. 184 (https://archive.org/details/essentialneur
osc00sieg/page/n197)–189. ISBN 978-0-7817-8383-5.
40. Swaab, Dick F. (2003). The Human Hypothalamus – Basic and Clinical Aspects: Nuclei of
the human hypothalamus. Part I (https://books.google.com/books?id=dOSzzQEACAAJ&q=9
780444514905). Elsevier. ISBN 9780444514905. Retrieved 2021-01-22.
41. Jones, Edward G. (1985). The Thalamus (https://books.google.com/books?id=WMxqAAAAM
AAJ). University of Michigan: Plenum Press. ISBN 9780306418563.
42. Knierim, James. "Cerebellum (Section 3, Chapter 5)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20171118
210533/http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s3/chapter05.html). Neuroscience Online.
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy at The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston, McGovern Medical School. Archived from the original (http://neuroscience.uth.tm
c.edu/s3/chapter05.html) on 2017-11-18. Retrieved 22 January 2021.
43. Saitoh, K; Ménard, A; Grillner, S (2007). "Tectal control of locomotion, steering, and eye
movements in lamprey". Journal of Neurophysiology. 97 (4): 3093–3108.
doi:10.1152/jn.00639.2006 (https://doi.org/10.1152%2Fjn.00639.2006). PMID 17303814 (htt
ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17303814).
44. Richard Swann Lull; Harry Burr Ferris; George Howard Parker; James Rowland Angell;
Albert Galloway Keller; Edwin Grant Conklin (1922). The evolution of man: a series of
lectures delivered before the Yale chapter of the Sigma xi during the academic year 1921–
1922 (https://archive.org/details/evolutionofman01bait). Yale University Press. p. 50 (https://a
rchive.org/details/evolutionofman01bait/page/50).
45. Puelles, L (2001). "Thoughts on the development, structure and evolution of the mammalian
and avian telencephalic pallium" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1088538).
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 356 (1414): 1583–1598.
doi:10.1098/rstb.2001.0973 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.2001.0973). PMC 1088538 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1088538). PMID 11604125 (https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/11604125).
46. Salas, C; Broglio, C; Rodríguez, F (2003). "Evolution of forebrain and spatial cognition in
vertebrates: conservation across diversity". Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 62 (2): 72–82.
doi:10.1159/000072438 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000072438). PMID 12937346 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12937346). S2CID 23055468 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Corpus
ID:23055468).
47. Grillner, S; et al. (2005). "Mechanisms for selection of basic motor programs—roles for the
striatum and pallidum". Trends in Neurosciences. 28 (7): 364–370.
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2005.05.004 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tins.2005.05.004).
PMID 15935487 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15935487). S2CID 12927634 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12927634).
48. Northcutt, RG (1981). "Evolution of the telencephalon in nonmammals". Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 4: 301–350. doi:10.1146/annurev.ne.04.030181.001505 (https://doi.org/10.11
46%2Fannurev.ne.04.030181.001505). PMID 7013637 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/701
3637).
49. Reiter, Sam; Liaw, Hua-Peng; Yamawaki, Tracy M.; Naumann, Robert K.; Laurent, Gilles
(2017). "On the Value of Reptilian Brains to Map the Evolution of the Hippocampal
Formation" (https://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/478693). Brain, Behavior and Evolution.
90 (1): 41–52. doi:10.1159/000478693 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000478693). ISSN 0006-
8977 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0006-8977). PMID 28866680 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/28866680).
50. "Species Statistics Aug 2019" (http://www.reptile-database.org/db-info/SpeciesStat.html).
www.reptile-database.org. Retrieved 2022-12-06.
51. "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2022-1 - Summary Statistics" (https://w
ww.iucnredlist.org/resources/summary-statistics). IUCN Red List. 2022. ISSN 2307-8235 (htt
ps://www.worldcat.org/issn/2307-8235). Retrieved December 6, 2022.
52. Nomura, Tadashi; Kawaguchi, Masahumi; Ono, Katsuhiko; Murakami, Yasunori (March
2013). "Reptiles: A New Model for Brain Evo-Devo Research: REPTILES FOR EVO-DEVO
RESEARCH" (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jez.b.22484). Journal of
Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution. 320 (2): 57–73.
doi:10.1002/jez.b.22484 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fjez.b.22484). PMID 23319423 (https://p
ubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23319423).
53. Salas, Cosme; Broglio, Cristina; Rodríguez, Fernando (2003). "Evolution of Forebrain and
Spatial Cognition in Vertebrates: Conservation across Diversity" (https://www.karger.com/Arti
cle/FullText/72438). Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 62 (2): 72–82. doi:10.1159/000072438 (h
ttps://doi.org/10.1159%2F000072438). ISSN 0006-8977 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0006-
8977). PMID 12937346 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12937346).
54. Northcutt, R. Glenn (2013). "Variation in Reptilian Brains and Cognition" (https://www.karger.
com/Article/FullText/351996). Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 82 (1): 45–54.
doi:10.1159/000351996 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000351996). ISSN 0006-8977 (https://w
ww.worldcat.org/issn/0006-8977). PMID 23979455 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/239794
55).
55. Naumann, Robert K.; Ondracek, Janie M.; Reiter, Samuel; Shein-Idelson, Mark; Tosches,
Maria Antonietta; Yamawaki, Tracy M.; Laurent, Gilles (2015-04-20). "The reptilian brain" (htt
ps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4406946). Current Biology. 25 (8): R317–R321.
Bibcode:2015CBio...25.R317N (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015CBio...25.R317N).
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.049 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.02.049). ISSN 0960-
9822 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0960-9822). PMC 4406946 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC4406946). PMID 25898097 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25898097).
56. Hain, David; Gallego-Flores, Tatiana; Klinkmann, Michaela; Macias, Angeles; Ciirdaeva,
Elena; Arends, Anja; Thum, Christina; Tushev, Georgi; Kretschmer, Friedrich; Tosches, Maria
Antonietta; Laurent, Gilles (2022-09-02). "Molecular diversity and evolution of neuron types
in the amniote brain" (https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abp8202). Science. 377
(6610): eabp8202. doi:10.1126/science.abp8202 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.abp82
02). ISSN 0036-8075 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0036-8075). PMID 36048944 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36048944).
57. Tosches, Maria Antonietta; Yamawaki, Tracy M.; Naumann, Robert K.; Jacobi, Ariel A.;
Tushev, Georgi; Laurent, Gilles (2018-05-25). "Evolution of pallium, hippocampus, and
cortical cell types revealed by single-cell transcriptomics in reptiles" (https://www.science.or
g/doi/10.1126/science.aar4237). Science. 360 (6391): 881–888.
Bibcode:2018Sci...360..881T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018Sci...360..881T).
doi:10.1126/science.aar4237 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.aar4237). ISSN 0036-
8075 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0036-8075). PMID 29724907 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/29724907).
58. Blanton, Mark G.; Kriegstein, Arnold R. (1991-08-22). "Morphological differentiation of
distinct neuronal classes in embryonic turtle cerebral cortex" (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/d
oi/10.1002/cne.903100405). The Journal of Comparative Neurology. 310 (4): 550–570.
doi:10.1002/cne.903100405 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fcne.903100405). ISSN 0021-9967
(https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0021-9967). PMID 1719040 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
1719040).
59. William, Butler, Ann B. Hodos (2005). Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy : evolution and
adaptation (http://worldcat.org/oclc/489018202). Wiley-Liss. ISBN 0-471-21005-6.
OCLC 489018202 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/489018202).
60. Northcutt, RG (2002). "Understanding vertebrate brain evolution" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2
Ficb%2F42.4.743). Integrative and Comparative Biology. 42 (4): 743–756.
doi:10.1093/icb/42.4.743 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2F42.4.743). PMID 21708771 (htt
ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21708771).
61. Barton, RA; Harvey, PH (2000). "Mosaic evolution of brain structure in mammals". Nature.
405 (6790): 1055–1058. Bibcode:2000Natur.405.1055B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2
000Natur.405.1055B). doi:10.1038/35016580 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F35016580).
PMID 10890446 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10890446). S2CID 52854758 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52854758).
62. Aboitiz, F; Morales, D; Montiel, J (2003). "The evolutionary origin of the mammalian
isocortex: Towards an integrated developmental and functional approach". Behavioral and
Brain Sciences. 26 (5): 535–552. doi:10.1017/S0140525X03000128 (https://doi.org/10.101
7%2FS0140525X03000128). PMID 15179935 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15179935).
S2CID 6599761 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6599761).
63. Romer, AS; Parsons, TS (1977). The Vertebrate Body. Holt-Saunders International. p. 531.
ISBN 978-0-03-910284-5.
64. Roth, G; Dicke, U (2005). "Evolution of the brain and Intelligence". Trends in Cognitive
Sciences. 9 (5): 250–257. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.03.005 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tics.20
05.03.005). PMID 15866152 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15866152). S2CID 14758763
(https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14758763).
65. Marino, Lori (2004). "Cetacean Brain Evolution: Multiplication Generates Complexity" (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20180916132752/http://www.cogs.indiana.edu/spackled/2005readin
gs/CetaceanBrainEvolution.pdf) (PDF). International Society for Comparative Psychology
(17): 1–16. Archived from the original (http://www.cogs.indiana.edu/spackled/2005readings/
CetaceanBrainEvolution.pdf) (PDF) on 2018-09-16. Retrieved 2010-08-29.
66. Shoshani, J; Kupsky, WJ; Marchant, GH (2006). "Elephant brain Part I: Gross morphology,
functions, comparative anatomy, and evolution". Brain Research Bulletin. 70 (2): 124–157.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.03.016 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.brainresbull.2006.03.01
6). PMID 16782503 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16782503). S2CID 14339772 (https://a
pi.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14339772).
67. Finlay, BL; Darlington, RB; Nicastro, N (2001). "Developmental structure in brain evolution".
Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 24 (2): 263–308. doi:10.1017/S0140525X01003958 (https://
doi.org/10.1017%2FS0140525X01003958). PMID 11530543 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.g
ov/11530543). S2CID 20978251 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:20978251).
68. Calvin, William H. (1996). How Brains Think (https://archive.org/details/howbrainsthinkev00c
alv) (1st ed.). New York, NY: BasicBooks. ISBN 978-0-465-07278-1.
69. Sereno, MI; Dale, AM; Reppas, AM; Kwong, KK; Belliveau, JW; Brady, TJ; Rosen, BR;
Tootell, RBH (1995). "Borders of multiple visual areas in human revealed by functional
magnetic resonance imaging" (http://www.cogsci.ucsd.edu/~sereno/papers/HumanRetin95.p
df) (PDF). Science. 268 (5212): 889–893. Bibcode:1995Sci...268..889S (https://ui.adsabs.har
vard.edu/abs/1995Sci...268..889S). doi:10.1126/science.7754376 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2
Fscience.7754376). PMID 7754376 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7754376). Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20060523153637/http://cogsci.ucsd.edu/~sereno/papers/HumanR
etin95.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 2006-05-23.
70. Fuster, Joaquín M. (2008). The Prefrontal Cortex (https://archive.org/details/prefrontalcortex0
0fust_846) (4th ed.). Elsevier. pp. 1 (https://archive.org/details/prefrontalcortex00fust_846/pa
ge/n15)–7. ISBN 978-0-12-373644-4.
71. Purves, Dale.; Lichtman, Jeff W. (1985). Principles of neural development (https://archive.org/
details/unset0000unse_m8p7). Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates. ISBN 978-0-87893-
744-8. OCLC 10798963 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/10798963).
72. Wong, RO (1999). "Retinal waves and visual system development". Annual Review of
Neuroscience. 22. St. Louis, MO: 29–47. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.22.1.29 (https://doi.org/1
0.1146%2Fannurev.neuro.22.1.29). PMID 10202531 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10202
531).
73. Rakic, Pasko (2002). "Adult neurogenesis in mammals: an identity crisis" (https://www.ncbi.n
lm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758501). Journal of Neuroscience. 22 (3): 614–618.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00614.2002 (https://doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.22-0
3-00614.2002). PMC 6758501 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758501).
PMID 11826088 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11826088).
74. Ridley, Matt (2004). Nature via Nurture: Genes, Experience, and What Makes Us Human (htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=9TkUHQAACAAJ). HarperCollins. pp. 1–6. ISBN 978-0-
06-000678-5.
75. Wiesel, T (1982). "Postnatal development of the visual cortex and the influence of
environment" (http://www.nobel.se/medicine/laureates/1981/wiesel-lecture.pdf) (PDF).
Nature. 299 (5884): 583–591. Bibcode:1982Natur.299..583W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/1982Natur.299..583W). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.547.7497 (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdo
c/summary?doi=10.1.1.547.7497). doi:10.1038/299583a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F29958
3a0). PMID 6811951 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6811951). S2CID 38776857 (https://a
pi.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:38776857). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/2022
1009/http://www.nobel.se/medicine/laureates/1981/wiesel-lecture.pdf) (PDF) from the
original on 2022-10-09.
76. van Praag, H; Kempermann, G; Gage, FH (2000). "Neural consequences of environmental
enrichment". Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 1 (3): 191–198. doi:10.1038/35044558 (https://d
oi.org/10.1038%2F35044558). PMID 11257907 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1125790
7). S2CID 9750498 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9750498).
77. Cooper, JR; Bloom, FE; Roth, RH (2003). The Biochemical Basis of Neuropharmacology (htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=e5I5gOwxVMkC). Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-
0-19-514008-8.
78. McGeer, PL; McGeer, EG (1989). "Chapter 15, Amino acid neurotransmitters". In G. Siegel;
et al. (eds.). Basic Neurochemistry. University of Michigan: Raven Press. pp. 311–332.
ISBN 978-0-88167-343-2.
79. Foster, AC; Kemp, JA (2006). "Glutamate- and GABA-based CNS therapeutics". Current
Opinion in Pharmacology. 6 (1): 7–17. doi:10.1016/j.coph.2005.11.005 (https://doi.org/10.101
6%2Fj.coph.2005.11.005). PMID 16377242 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16377242).
80. Frazer, A; Hensler, JG (1999). "Understanding the neuroanatomical organization of
serotonergic cells in the brain provides insight into the functions of this neurotransmitter". In
Siegel, GJ (ed.). Basic Neurochemistry (Sixth ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 978-
0-397-51820-3.
81. Mehler, MF; Purpura, DP (2009). "Autism, fever, epigenetics and the locus coeruleus" (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2668953). Brain Research Reviews. 59 (2): 388–
392. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2008.11.001 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.brainresrev.2008.1
1.001). PMC 2668953 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2668953).
PMID 19059284 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19059284).
82. Rang, HP (2003). Pharmacology. Churchill Livingstone. pp. 476–483. ISBN 978-0-443-
07145-4.
83. Speckmann EJ, Elger CE (2004). "Introduction to the neurophysiological basis of the EEG
and DC potentials". In Niedermeyer E, Lopes da Silva FH (eds.). Electroencephalography:
Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
pp. 17–31. ISBN 978-0-7817-5126-1.
84. Buzsáki, Gyorgy (2006). Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press.
ISBN 9780199828234.
85. Nieuwenhuys, R; Donkelaar, HJ; Nicholson, C (1998). The Central Nervous System of
Vertebrates, Volume 1. Springer. pp. 11–14. ISBN 978-3-540-56013-5.
86. Safi, K; Seid, MA; Dechmann, DK (2005). "Bigger is not always better: when brains get
smaller" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1617168). Biology Letters. 1 (3):
283–286. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2005.0333 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsbl.2005.0333).
PMC 1617168 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1617168). PMID 17148188 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17148188).
87. Mink, JW; Blumenschine, RJ; Adams, DB (1981). "Ratio of central nervous system to body
metabolism in vertebrates: its constancy and functional basis" (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0200817190752/https://works.bepress.com/david-adams/3/). American Journal of
Physiology (Submitted manuscript). 241 (3): R203–212.
doi:10.1152/ajpregu.1981.241.3.R203 (https://doi.org/10.1152%2Fajpregu.1981.241.3.R20
3). PMID 7282965 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7282965). Archived from the original (htt
ps://works.bepress.com/david-adams/3) on 2020-08-17. Retrieved 2021-02-10.
88. Raichle, M; Gusnard, DA (2002). "Appraising the brain's energy budget" (https://www.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC124895). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (16): 10237–10239.
Bibcode:2002PNAS...9910237R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002PNAS...9910237
R). doi:10.1073/pnas.172399499 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.172399499).
PMC 124895 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC124895). PMID 12149485 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12149485).
89. Mehagnoul-Schipper, DJ; Van Der Kallen, BF; Colier, WNJM; Van Der Sluijs, MC; Van
Erning, LJ; Thijssen, HO; Oeseburg, B; Hoefnagels, WH; Jansen, RW (2002). "Simultaneous
measurements of cerebral oxygenation changes during brain activation by near-infrared
spectroscopy and functional magnetic resonance imaging in healthy young and elderly
subjects" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6871837). Hum Brain Mapp. 16 (1):
14–23. doi:10.1002/hbm.10026 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fhbm.10026). PMC 6871837 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6871837). PMID 11870923 (https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/11870923).
90. Ebert, D.; Haller, RG.; Walton, ME. (Jul 2003). "Energy contribution of octanoate to intact rat
brain metabolism measured by 13C nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6741266). J Neurosci. 23 (13): 5928–5935.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-13-05928.2003 (https://doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.23-1
3-05928.2003). PMC 6741266 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6741266).
PMID 12843297 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12843297).
91. Marin-Valencia, I.; Good, LB.; Ma, Q.; Malloy, CR.; Pascual, JM. (Feb 2013). "Heptanoate as
a neural fuel: energetic and neurotransmitter precursors in normal and glucose transporter I-
deficient (G1D) brain" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3564188). J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 33 (2): 175–182. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2012.151 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F
jcbfm.2012.151). PMC 3564188 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3564188).
PMID 23072752 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23072752).
92. Boumezbeur, F.; Petersen, KF.; Cline, GW.; Mason, GF.; Behar, KL.; Shulman, GI.; Rothman,
DL. (Oct 2010). "The contribution of blood lactate to brain energy metabolism in humans
measured by dynamic 13C nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" (https://www.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2996729). J Neurosci. 30 (42): 13983–13991.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2040-10.2010 (https://doi.org/10.1523%2FJNEUROSCI.2040-10.
2010). PMC 2996729 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2996729).
PMID 20962220 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20962220).
93. Deelchand, DK.; Shestov, AA.; Koski, DM.; Uğurbil, K.; Henry, PG. (May 2009). "Acetate
transport and utilization in the rat brain" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2722
917). J Neurochem. 109 (Suppl 1): 46–54. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.05895.x (https://do
i.org/10.1111%2Fj.1471-4159.2009.05895.x). PMC 2722917 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC2722917). PMID 19393008 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19393008).
94. Soengas, JL; Aldegunde, M (2002). "Energy metabolism of fish brain". Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology B. 131 (3): 271–296. doi:10.1016/S1096-4959(02)00022-2 (htt
ps://doi.org/10.1016%2FS1096-4959%2802%2900022-2). PMID 11959012 (https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11959012).
95. Carew, TJ (2000). "Ch. 1" (https://books.google.com/books?id=wEMTGwAACAAJ).
Behavioral Neurobiology: the Cellular Organization of Natural Behavior. Sinauer Associates.
ISBN 978-0-87893-092-0.
96. Dafny, N. "Anatomy of the spinal cord" (https://web.archive.org/web/20111008172218/http://n
euroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s2/chapter03.html). Neuroscience Online. Archived from the
original (http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s2/chapter03.html) on 2011-10-08. Retrieved
2011-10-10.
97. Dragoi, V. "Ocular motor system" (https://web.archive.org/web/20111117070343/http://neuro
science.uth.tmc.edu/s3/chapter07.html). Neuroscience Online. Archived from the original (htt
p://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s3/chapter07.html) on 2011-11-17. Retrieved 2011-10-10.
98. Gurney, K; Prescott, TJ; Wickens, JR; Redgrave, P (2004). "Computational models of the
basal ganglia: from robots to membranes". Trends in Neurosciences. 27 (8): 453–459.
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2004.06.003 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tins.2004.06.003).
PMID 15271492 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15271492). S2CID 2148363 (https://api.se
manticscholar.org/CorpusID:2148363).
99. Knierim, James. "Motor Cortex (Section 3, Chapter 3)" (https://nba.uth.tmc.edu/neuroscience/
s3/chapter03.html). Neuroscience Online. Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy at The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, McGovern Medical School. Retrieved
2021-01-23.
100. Shima, K; Tanji, J (1998). "Both supplementary and presupplementary motor areas are
crucial for the temporal organization of multiple movements". Journal of Neurophysiology. 80
(6): 3247–3260. doi:10.1152/jn.1998.80.6.3247 (https://doi.org/10.1152%2Fjn.1998.80.6.324
7). PMID 9862919 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9862919).
101. Miller, EK; Cohen, JD (2001). "An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function". Annual
Review of Neuroscience. 24 (1): 167–202. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167 (https://doi.or
g/10.1146%2Fannurev.neuro.24.1.167). PMID 11283309 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1
1283309). S2CID 7301474 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:7301474).
102. Antle, MC; Silver, R (2005). "Orchestrating time: arrangements of the brain circadian clock"
(https://web.archive.org/web/20081031120051/http://www.columbia.edu/cu/psychology/silve
r/publications2/149%20antle%20et%20al.pdf) (PDF). Trends in Neurosciences. 28 (3): 145–
151. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2005.01.003 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tins.2005.01.003).
PMID 15749168 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15749168). S2CID 10618277 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10618277). Archived from the original (http://www.columbia.ed
u/cu/psychology/silver/publications2/149%20antle%20et%20al.pdf) (PDF) on 2008-10-31.
103. Kleitman, Nathaniel (1939). Sleep and Wakefulness. Revised and enlarged edition 1963,
Reprint edition 1987. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, Midway Reprint. ISBN 978-
0-226-44073-6.
104. Dougherty, Patrick. "Hypothalamus: structural organization" (https://web.archive.org/web/201
11117073211/http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s4/chapter01.html). Neuroscience Online.
Archived from the original (http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s4/chapter01.html) on 2011-11-
17. Retrieved 2011-10-11.
105. Gross, Charles G. (1998). "Claude Bernard and the constancy of the internal environment" (h
ttps://web.archive.org/web/20181208033601/http://www.princeton.edu/~cggross/Neuroscient
ist_98_Bernard.pdf) (PDF). The Neuroscientist. 4 (5): 380–385.
doi:10.1177/107385849800400520 (https://doi.org/10.1177%2F107385849800400520).
S2CID 51424670 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:51424670). Archived from the
original (http://www.princeton.edu/~cggross/Neuroscientist_98_Bernard.pdf) (PDF) on 2018-
12-08.
106. Dougherty, Patrick. "Hypothalamic control of pituitary hormone" (https://web.archive.org/web/
20111117073249/http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s4/chapter02.html). Neuroscience Online.
Archived from the original (http://neuroscience.uth.tmc.edu/s4/chapter02.html) on 2011-11-
17. Retrieved 2011-10-11.
107. Chiel, HJ; Beer, RD (1997). "The brain has a body: adaptive behavior emerges from
interactions of nervous system, body, and environment". Trends in Neurosciences. 20 (12):
553–557. doi:10.1016/S0166-2236(97)01149-1 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0166-2236%28
97%2901149-1). PMID 9416664 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9416664).
S2CID 5634365 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5634365).
108. Berridge, KC (2004). "Motivation concepts in behavioral neuroscience". Physiology &
Behavior. 81 (2): 179–209. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.02.004 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.
physbeh.2004.02.004). PMID 15159167 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15159167).
S2CID 14149019 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14149019).
109. Ardiel, EL; Rankin, CH (2010). "An elegant mind: learning and memory in Caenorhabditis
elegans" (https://doi.org/10.1101%2Flm.960510). Learning and Memory. 17 (4): 191–201.
doi:10.1101/lm.960510 (https://doi.org/10.1101%2Flm.960510). PMID 20335372 (https://pub
med.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20335372).
110. Hyman, SE; Malenka, RC (2001). "Addiction and the brain: the neurobiology of compulsion
and its persistence" (https://zenodo.org/record/1233105). Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2
(10): 695–703. doi:10.1038/35094560 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F35094560).
PMID 11584307 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11584307). S2CID 3333114 (https://api.se
manticscholar.org/CorpusID:3333114).
111. Ramón y Cajal, S (1894). "The Croonian Lecture: La Fine Structure des Centres Nerveux" (h
ttps://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspl.1894.0063). Proceedings of the Royal Society. 55 (331–335):
444–468. Bibcode:1894RSPS...55..444C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1894RSPS...5
5..444C). doi:10.1098/rspl.1894.0063 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspl.1894.0063).
112. Lømo, T (2003). "The discovery of long-term potentiation" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC1693150). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 358 (1432): 617–
620. doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1226 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.2002.1226). PMC 1693150
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1693150). PMID 12740104 (https://pubmed.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/12740104).
113. Malenka, R; Bear, M (2004). "LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches" (https://doi.org/10.1
016%2Fj.neuron.2004.09.012). Neuron. 44 (1): 5–21. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.012 (http
s://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.neuron.2004.09.012). PMID 15450156 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/15450156). S2CID 79844 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:79844).
114. Bos, I; De Boever, P; Int Panis, L; Meeusen, R (2004). "Physical Activity, Air Pollution and the
Brain" (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264793941). Sports Medicine. 44 (11):
1505–1518. doi:10.1007/s40279-014-0222-6 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs40279-014-0222-
6). PMID 25119155 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25119155). S2CID 207493297 (https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:207493297).
115. Curtis, CE; D'Esposito, M (2003). "Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during working
memory". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 7 (9): 415–423. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.457.9723 (https://
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.457.9723). doi:10.1016/S1364-
6613(03)00197-9 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS1364-6613%2803%2900197-9).
PMID 12963473 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12963473). S2CID 15763406 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15763406).
116. Tulving, E; Markowitsch, HJ (1998). "Episodic and declarative memory: role of the
hippocampus" (https://doi.org/10.1002%2F%28SICI%291098-1063%281998%298%3A3%3
C198%3A%3AAID-HIPO2%3E3.0.CO%3B2-G). Hippocampus. 8 (3): 198–204.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1998)8:3<198::AID-HIPO2>3.0.CO;2-G (https://doi.org/10.100
2%2F%28SICI%291098-1063%281998%298%3A3%3C198%3A%3AAID-HIPO2%3E3.0.C
O%3B2-G). PMID 9662134 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9662134). S2CID 18634842 (ht
tps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18634842).
117. Martin, A; Chao, LL (2001). "Semantic memory and the brain: structures and processes".
Current Opinion in Neurobiology. 11 (2): 194–201. doi:10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00196-3 (htt
ps://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0959-4388%2800%2900196-3). PMID 11301239 (https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11301239). S2CID 3700874 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:370
0874).
118. Balleine, BW; Liljeholm, Mimi; Ostlund, SB (2009). "The integrative function of the basal
ganglia in instrumental learning". Behavioural Brain Research. 199 (1): 43–52.
doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2008.10.034 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.bbr.2008.10.034).
PMID 19027797 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19027797). S2CID 36521958 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:36521958).
119. Doya, K (2000). "Complementary roles of basal ganglia and cerebellum in learning and
motor control". Current Opinion in Neurobiology. 10 (6): 732–739. doi:10.1016/S0959-
4388(00)00153-7 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0959-4388%2800%2900153-7).
PMID 11240282 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11240282). S2CID 10962570 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10962570).
120. Storrow, Hugh A. (1969). Outline of clinical psychiatry. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
Educational Division. ISBN 978-0-390-85075-1. OCLC 47198 (https://www.worldcat.org/ocl
c/47198).
121. Thagard, Paul (2007). "Cognitive Science" (https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entrie
s/cognitive-science/). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Revised, 2nd ed.). Retrieved
2021-01-23.
122. Bear, MF; Connors, BW; Paradiso, MA (2007). "Ch. 2". Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain (ht
tps://archive.org/details/neuroscienceexpl00mark). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 978-
0-7817-6003-4.
123. Dowling, JE (2001). Neurons and Networks. Harvard University Press. pp. 15–24. ISBN 978-
0-674-00462-7.
124. Wyllie, E; Gupta, A; Lachhwani, DK (2005). "Ch. 77". The Treatment of Epilepsy: Principles
and Practice. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-7817-4995-4.
125. Laureys S, Boly M, Tononi G (2009). "Functional neuroimaging". In Laureys S, Tononi G
(eds.). The Neurology of Consciousness: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuropathology (http
s://archive.org/details/neurologyconscio00laur_765). Academic Press. pp. 31 (https://archive.
org/details/neurologyconscio00laur_765/page/n45)–42. ISBN 978-0-12-374168-4.
126. Carmena, JM; et al. (2003). "Learning to Control a Brain–Machine Interface for Reaching and
Grasping by Primates" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC261882). PLOS
Biology. 1 (2): 193–208. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0000042 (https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjourn
al.pbio.0000042). PMC 261882 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC261882).
PMID 14624244 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14624244).
127. Kolb, B; Whishaw, I (2008). "Ch. 1". Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology. Macmillan.
ISBN 978-0-7167-9586-5.
128. Abbott, LF; Dayan, P (2001). "Preface". Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and
Mathematical Modeling of Neural Systems. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-54185-5.
129. Tonegawa, S; Nakazawa, K; Wilson, MA (2003). "Genetic neuroscience of mammalian
learning and memory" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1693163).
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 358 (1432): 787–795.
doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1243 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.2002.1243). PMC 1693163 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1693163). PMID 12740125 (https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/12740125).
130. Emani, PS; et al. (2024). "Single-cell genomics and regulatory networks for 388 human
brains". Science. 384. doi:10.1126/science.adi5199 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.adi5
199). PMID 38781369 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38781369).
131. Bower, Bruce (2009-01-12). "Armenian cave yields ancient human brain" (https://www.scienc
enews.org/article/armenian-cave-yields-ancient-human-brain). ScienceNews. Retrieved
2021-01-23.
132. Finger, Stanley (2001). Origins of Neuroscience. Oxford University Press. pp. 14–15.
ISBN 978-0-19-514694-3.
133. *Hippocrates (2006) [400 BCE], On the Sacred Disease (https://web.archive.org/web/200709
26213032/http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/mirror/classics.mit.edu/Hippocrates/sacred.htm
l), Translated by Francis Adams, Internet Classics Archive: The University of Adelaide
Library, archived from the original (http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/mirror/classics.mit.edu/
Hippocrates/sacred.html) on September 26, 2007
134. Bloom FE (1975). Schmidt FO, Worden FG, Swazey JP, Adelman G (eds.). The
Neurosciences, Paths of Discovery (https://archive.org/details/TheNeurosc_00_Word/page/2
11). MIT Press. p. 211 (https://archive.org/details/TheNeurosc_00_Word/page/211).
ISBN 978-0-262-23072-8.
135. Shepherd, GM (1991). "Ch.1 : Introduction and Overview". Foundations of the Neuron
Doctrine. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-506491-9.
136. Piccolino, M (2002). "Fifty years of the Hodgkin-Huxley era". Trends in Neurosciences. 25
(11): 552–553. doi:10.1016/S0166-2236(02)02276-2 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0166-223
6%2802%2902276-2). PMID 12392928 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12392928).
S2CID 35465936 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:35465936).
137. Sherrington, CS (1942). Man on his nature (https://archive.org/details/isbn_9780838577011/
page/178). Cambridge University Press. p. 178 (https://archive.org/details/isbn_9780838577
011/page/178). ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1.
138. Churchland, PS; Koch, C; Sejnowski, TJ (1993). "What is computational neuroscience?". In
Schwartz EL (ed.). Computational Neuroscience. MIT Press. pp. 46–55. ISBN 978-0-262-
69164-2.
139. von Neumann, J; Churchland, PM; Churchland, PS (2000). The Computer and the Brain (htt
ps://archive.org/details/computerbrain0000vonn). Yale University Press. pp. xi–xxii.
ISBN 978-0-300-08473-3.
140. Lettvin, JY; Maturana, HR; McCulloch, WS; Pitts, WH (1959). "What the frog's eye tells the
frog's brain" (https://web.archive.org/web/20110928024235/http://jerome.lettvin.info/lettvin/Je
rome/WhatTheFrogsEyeTellsTheFrogsBrain.pdf) (PDF). Proceedings of the Institute of
Radio Engineers. 47 (11): 1940–1951. doi:10.1109/jrproc.1959.287207 (https://doi.org/10.11
09%2Fjrproc.1959.287207). S2CID 8739509 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8739
509). Archived from the original (http://jerome.lettvin.info/lettvin/Jerome/WhatTheFrogsEyeTe
llsTheFrogsBrain.pdf) (PDF) on 2011-09-28.
141. Hubel, DH; Wiesel, TN (2005). Brain and visual perception: the story of a 25-year
collaboration (https://archive.org/details/brainvisualperce00hube). Oxford University Press
US. pp. 657 (https://archive.org/details/brainvisualperce00hube/page/n665)–704. ISBN 978-
0-19-517618-6.
142. Farah, MJ (2000). The Cognitive Neuroscience of Vision. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 1–29.
ISBN 978-0-631-21403-8.
143. Engel, AK; Singer, W (2001). "Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory
awareness". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 5 (1): 16–25. doi:10.1016/S1364-
6613(00)01568-0 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS1364-6613%2800%2901568-0).
PMID 11164732 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11164732). S2CID 11922975 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11922975).
144. Dayan, P; Abbott, LF (2005). "Ch.7: Network models". Theoretical Neuroscience. MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0-262-54185-5.
145. Averbeck, BB; Lee, D (2004). "Coding and transmission of information by neural
ensembles". Trends in Neurosciences. 27 (4): 225–230. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2004.02.006 (http
s://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tins.2004.02.006). PMID 15046882 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/15046882). S2CID 44512482 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:44512482).
146. Forrest, MD (2014). "Intracellular Calcium Dynamics Permit a Purkinje Neuron Model to
Perform Toggle and Gain Computations Upon its Inputs" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/a
rticles/PMC4138505). Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 8: 86.
doi:10.3389/fncom.2014.00086 (https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffncom.2014.00086).
PMC 4138505 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4138505). PMID 25191262 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25191262).
147. Jones, EG; Mendell, LM (1999). "Assessing the Decade of the Brain". Science. 284 (5415):
739. Bibcode:1999Sci...284..739J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999Sci...284..739J).
doi:10.1126/science.284.5415.739 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.284.5415.739).
PMID 10336393 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10336393). S2CID 13261978 (https://api.s
emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13261978).
148. Buzsáki, G (2004). "Large-scale recording of neuronal ensembles" (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20060910225619/http://osiris.rutgers.edu/BuzsakiHP/Publications/PDFs/Buzsaki2004Na
tNeurosci.pdf) (PDF). Nature Neuroscience. 7 (5): 446–451. doi:10.1038/nn1233 (https://doi.
org/10.1038%2Fnn1233). PMID 15114356 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15114356).
S2CID 18538341 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18538341). Archived from the
original (http://osiris.rutgers.edu/BuzsakiHP/Publications/PDFs/Buzsaki2004NatNeurosci.pd
f) (PDF) on 2006-09-10.
149. Geschwind, DH; Konopka, G (2009). "Neuroscience in the era of functional genomics and
systems biology" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3645852). Nature. 461
(7266): 908–915. Bibcode:2009Natur.461..908G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009Nat
ur.461..908G). doi:10.1038/nature08537 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature08537).
PMC 3645852 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3645852). PMID 19829370 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19829370).
150. Connell, Evan S. (2001). The Aztec Treasure House (https://archive.org/details/aztectreasure
hou00conn). Counterpoint Press. ISBN 978-1-58243-162-8.
151. Collins, S; McLean CA; Masters CL (2001). "Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome,
fatal familial insomnia, and kuru: a review of these less common human transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies". Journal of Clinical Neuroscience. 8 (5): 387–397.
doi:10.1054/jocn.2001.0919 (https://doi.org/10.1054%2Fjocn.2001.0919). PMID 11535002
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11535002). S2CID 31976428 (https://api.semanticscholar.o
rg/CorpusID:31976428).
The Brain from Top to Bottom (http://thebrain.mcgill.ca), at McGill University
"The Brain" (https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00b54yx), BBC Radio 4 discussion with
Vivian Nutton, Jonathan Sawday & Marina Wallace (In Our Time, May 8, 2008)
Our Quest to Understand the Brain – with Matthew Cobb (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=NifNfkliCos) Royal Institution lecture. Archived at Ghostarchive (https://ghostarchive.org/var
chive/NifNfkliCos).
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brain&oldid=1226272765"
External links
