Spinal nerve
The formation of the spinal nerve from
the posterior and anterior roots
Details
Identifiers
Latin
nervus spinalis
MeSH D013127 (https://meshb.nlm.ni
h.gov/record/ui?ui=D013127)
TA98
A14.2.00.027 (https://ifaa.unifr.c
h/Public/EntryPage/TA98%20Tr
ee/Entity%20TA98%20EN/14.2.
00.027%20Entity%20TA98%20
EN.htm)
TA2
6143 (https://ta2viewer.openan
atomy.org/?id=6143)
FMA
5858 (https://bioportal.bioontolo
gy.org/ontologies/FMA/?p=class
es&conceptid=http%3A%2F%2
Fpurl.org%2Fsig%2Font%2Ffm
a%2Ffma5858)
Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy
Spinal nerve
Typical spinal nerve location
Spinal nerve
A spinal nerve is a mixed nerve, which carries motor, sensory,
and autonomic signals between the spinal cord and the body. In
the human body there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves, one on each
side of the vertebral column.[1][2] These are grouped into the
corresponding cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral and coccygeal
regions of the spine.[1] There are eight pairs of cervical nerves,
twelve pairs of thoracic nerves, five pairs of lumbar nerves,
five pairs of sacral nerves, and one pair of coccygeal nerves.
The spinal nerves are part of the peripheral nervous system.[1]
Each spinal nerve is a mixed nerve, formed from the
combination of nerve root fibers from its dorsal and ventral
roots. The dorsal root is the afferent sensory root and carries
sensory information to the brain. The ventral root is the efferent
motor root and carries motor information from the brain. The
spinal nerve emerges from the spinal column through an opening
(intervertebral foramen) between adjacent vertebrae. This is true
for all spinal nerves except for the first spinal nerve pair (C1),
which emerges between the occipital bone and the atlas (the first
vertebra).[3] Thus the cervical nerves are numbered by the
vertebra below, except spinal nerve C8, which exists below
vertebra C7 and above vertebra T1. The thoracic, lumbar, and
sacral nerves are then numbered by the vertebra above. In the
case of a lumbarized S1 vertebra (also known as L6) or a
sacralized L5 vertebra, the nerves are typically still counted to
L5 and the next nerve is S1.
Structure
Scheme showing structure of a typical spinal nerve
1. Somatic efferent.
2. Somatic afferent.
3,4,5. Sympathetic efferent.
6,7. Autonomic afferent.
Cervical nerves
Outside the vertebral column, the nerve divides into
branches. The dorsal ramus contains nerves that serve
the posterior portions of the trunk carrying visceral
motor, somatic motor, and somatic sensory information
to and from the skin and muscles of the back (epaxial
muscles). The ventral ramus contains nerves that serve
the remaining anterior parts of the trunk and the upper
and lower limbs (hypaxial muscles) carrying visceral
motor, somatic motor, and sensory information to and
from the ventrolateral body surface, structures in the
body wall, and the limbs. The meningeal branches
(recurrent meningeal or sinuvertebral nerves) branch
from the spinal nerve and re-enter the intervertebral
foramen to serve the ligaments, dura, blood vessels,
intervertebral discs, facet joints, and periosteum of the
vertebrae. The rami communicantes contain autonomic
nerves that serve visceral functions carrying visceral
motor and sensory information to and from the visceral
organs.
Some anterior rami merge with adjacent anterior rami to form a nerve plexus, a network of interconnecting
nerves. Nerves emerging from a plexus contain fibers from various spinal nerves, which are now carried
together to some target location. The spinal plexuses are the cervical plexus, brachial plexus, lumbar plexus,
the sacral plexus and the much smaller coccygeal plexus.[3]
The cervical nerves are the spinal nerves from the cervical vertebrae
in the cervical segment of the spinal cord. Although there are seven
cervical vertebrae (C1–C7), there are eight cervical nerves C1–C8.
C1–C7 emerge above their corresponding vertebrae, while C8
emerges below the C7 vertebra. Everywhere else in the spine, the
nerve emerges below the vertebra with the same name.
The posterior distribution includes the suboccipital nerve (C1), the
greater occipital nerve (C2) and the third occipital nerve (C3). The
anterior distribution includes the cervical plexus (C1–C4) and
brachial plexus (C5–T1).
The cervical nerves innervate the sternohyoid, sternothyroid and
omohyoid muscles.
Regional nerves
Cervical nerves
Lumbar plexus and branches
A loop of nerves called ansa cervicalis is part of the cervical plexus.
The thoracic nerves are the twelve spinal nerves emerging from the thoracic vertebrae. Each thoracic nerve
T1–T12 originates from below each corresponding thoracic vertebra. Branches also exit the spine and go
directly to the paravertebral ganglia of the autonomic nervous system where they are involved in the
functions of organs and glands in the head, neck, thorax and abdomen.
The intercostal nerves come from thoracic nerves T1–T11, and run between the ribs. At T2 and T3, further
branches form the intercostobrachial nerve. The subcostal nerve comes from nerve T12, and runs below the
twelfth rib.
The medial branches (ramus medialis) of the posterior branches of the upper six thoracic nerves run
between the semispinalis dorsi and multifidus, which they supply; they then pierce the rhomboid and
trapezius muscles, and reach the skin by the sides of the spinous processes. This sensitive branch is called
the medial cutaneous ramus.
The medial branches of the lower six are distributed chiefly to the multifidus and longissimus dorsi,
occasionally they give off filaments to the skin near the middle line. This sensitive branch is called the
posterior cutaneous ramus.
The lumbar nerves are the five spinal nerves emerging from the
lumbar vertebrae. They are divided into posterior and anterior
divisions.
The medial branches of the posterior divisions of the lumbar nerves
run close to the articular processes of the vertebrae and end in the
multifidus muscle.
The laterals supply the erector spinae muscles.
The upper three give off cutaneous nerves which pierce the
aponeurosis of the latissimus dorsi at the lateral border of the erector
spinae muscles, and descend across the posterior part of the iliac
crest to the skin of the buttock, some of their twigs running as far as
the level of the greater trochanter.
Thoracic nerves
Anterior divisions
Posterior divisions
Lumbar nerves
Posterior divisions
Anterior divisions
Plan of sacral and pudendal
plexuses
The anterior divisions of the lumbar nerves (rami anteriores) increase in size from above downward. They
are joined, near their origins, by gray rami communicantes from the lumbar ganglia of the sympathetic
trunk. These rami consist of long, slender branches which accompany the lumbar arteries around the sides
of the vertebral bodies, beneath the psoas major. Their arrangement is somewhat irregular: one ganglion
may give rami to two lumbar nerves, or one lumbar nerve may receive rami from two ganglia.
The first and second, and sometimes the third and fourth lumbar nerves are each connected with the lumbar
part of the sympathetic trunk by a white ramus communicans.
The nerves pass obliquely outward behind the psoas major, or between its fasciculi, distributing filaments to
it and the quadratus lumborum.
The first three and the greater part of the fourth are connected together in this situation by anastomotic
loops, and form the lumbar plexus.
The smaller part of the fourth joins with the fifth to form the lumbosacral trunk, which assists in the
formation of the sacral plexus. The fourth nerve is named the furcal nerve, from the fact that it is subdivided
between the two plexuses.
The sacral nerves are the five pairs of spinal nerves which exit the
sacrum at the lower end of the vertebral column. The roots of these
nerves begin inside the vertebral column at the level of the L1
vertebra, where the cauda equina begins, and then descend into the
sacrum.[4][5]
There are five paired sacral nerves, half of them arising through the
sacrum on the left side and the other half on the right side. Each
nerve emerges in two divisions: one division through the anterior
sacral foramina and the other division through the posterior sacral
foramina.[4]
The nerves divide into branches and the branches from different
nerves join with one another, some of them also joining with lumbar
or coccygeal nerve branches. These anastomoses of nerves form the
sacral plexus and the lumbosacral plexus. The branches of these
plexus give rise to nerves that supply much of the hip, thigh, leg
and foot.[4][6]
The sacral nerves have both afferent and efferent fibers, thus they are responsible for part of the sensory
perception and the movements of the lower extremities of the human body. From the S2, S3 and S4 arise
the pudendal nerve and parasympathetic fibers whose electrical potential supply the descending colon and
rectum, urinary bladder and genital organs. These pathways have both afferent and efferent fibers and, this
Sacral nerves
Areas of distribution of the
cutaneous branches of the posterior
divisions of the spinal nerves. The
areas of the medial branches are in
black, those of the lateral in red
()
Actions of the spinal nerves
Level
Motor function
C1–C6
Neck flexors
C1–T1
Neck extensors
C3, C4, C5
Supply diaphragm (mostly C4)
C5, C6
Move shoulder, raise arm
(deltoid); flex elbow (biceps)
C6
externally rotate (supinate) the
arm
C6, C7
Extend elbow and wrist (triceps
and wrist extensors); pronate
wrist
C7, C8
Flex wrist; supply small
muscles of the hand
T1–T6
Intercostals and trunk above
the waist
T7–L1
Abdominal muscles
L1–L4
Flex hip joint
L2, L3, L4
Adduct thigh; Extend leg at the
knee (quadriceps femoris)
L4, L5, S1
abduct thigh; Flex leg at the
knee (hamstrings); Dorsiflex
foot (tibialis anterior); Extend
toes
L5, S1, S2
Extend leg at the hip (gluteus
maximus); flex foot and flex
toes
way, they are responsible for conduction of sensory information from these pelvic organs to the central
nervous system (CNS) and motor impulses from the CNS to the pelvis that control the movements of these
pelvic organs.[6]
The bilateral coccygeal nerves, Co, are the 31st pair of spinal nerves. It arises from the conus medullaris,
and its ventral ramus helps form the coccygeal plexus. It does not divide into a medial and lateral branch. Its
fibers are distributed to the skin superficial and posterior to the coccyx bone via the anococcygeal nerve of
the coccygeal nerve plexus.
Coccygeal nerves
Function
Spinal plexuses
A spinal plexus is a weblike nerve plexus formed by the anterior nerve roots that branch and merge
repeatedly. The only region that does not have a plexus is the thoracic region. The small cervical plexus is
in the neck, the brachial plexus is in the shoulder, the lumbar plexus is in the lower back, beneath this is the
sacral plexus, and next to the lower sacrum and coccyx is the very small coccygeal plexus.[3]
The muscles that one particular spinal root supplies are that nerve's myotome, and the dermatomes are the
areas of sensory innervation on the skin for each spinal nerve. Lesions of one or more nerve roots result in
typical patterns of neurologic defects (muscle weakness, abnormal sensation, changes in reflexes) that allow
localization of the responsible lesion.
There are several procedures used in sacral nerve stimulation for the treatment of various related disorders.
Sciatica is generally caused by the compression of lumbar nerves L4, or L5 or sacral nerves S1, S2, or S3,
or by compression of the sciatic nerve itself
A portion of the spinal
cord, showing its right
lateral surface. The
dura is opened and
arranged to show the
nerve roots.
 
Distribution of the
cutaneous nerves.
Ventral aspect.
 
Distribution of the
cutaneous nerves.
Dorsal aspect.
 
The spinal cord with
dura cut open,
showing the exits of
the spinal nerves.
The spinal cord
showing how the
anterior and posterior
roots join in the spinal
nerves.
 
A longer view of the
spinal cord.
 
Projections of the
spinal cord into the
nerves (red motor,
blue sensory).
 
Projections of the
spinal cord into the
nerves (red motor,
blue sensory).
Clinical significance
Additional Images
Schematic diagram of
cervical plexus.
Dissection images
Cerebrum. Inferior
view. Deep dissection.
 
Cerebrum. Inferior
view. Deep dissection.
 
Spinal nerves. Spinal
cord and vertebral
canal. Deep
dissection.
Plexus
Nerve plexus
Brachial plexus
Cranial nerves
1. Kaiser, JT; Lugo-Pico, JG (January 2024). Neuroanatomy, Spinal Nerves. PMID 31194375 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31194375).
2. "A Neurosurgeon's Overview of the Anatomy of the Spine and Peripheral Nervous System"
(https://www.aans.org/en/Patients/Neurosurgical-Conditions-and-Treatments/Anatomy-of-the
-Spine-and-Peripheral-Nervous-System). www.aans.org. Retrieved 21 December 2023.
3. Saladin, Kenneth S. (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 382–
388. ISBN 9780071222075.
4. 1. Anatomy, descriptive and surgical: Gray's anatomy. Gray, Henry. Philadelphia :
Courage Books/Running Press, 1974
5. 2. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. Moore, Keith L. Philadelphia : Wolters Kluwer
Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010 (6th ed)
See also
References
6. 3. Human Neuroanatomy. Carpenter, Malcolm B. Baltimore : Williams & Wilkins Co., 1976
(7th ed)
Blumenfeld H. 'Neuroanatomy Through Clinical Cases'. Sunderland, Mass: Sinauer
Associates; 2002.
Drake RL, Vogl W, Mitchell AWM. 'Gray's Anatomy for Students'. New York: Elsevier;
2005:69-70.
Ropper AH, Samuels MA. 'Adams and Victor's Principles of Neurology'. Ninth Edition. New
York: McGraw Hill; 2009.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spinal_nerve&oldid=1220828860"
